The Project Gutenberg eBook of Down among men, by Will Levington
Comfort

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Down among men

Author: Will Levington Comfort

Release Date: June 23, 2022 [eBook #68390]

Language: English

Produced by: D A Alexander and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by University of California
             libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOWN AMONG MEN ***





  _Down Among Men_

  BY

  WILL LEVINGTON COMFORT

  AUTHOR OF “ROUTLEDGE RIDES ALONE,”
  “FATE KNOCKS AT THE DOOR,” ETC.


  NEW YORK
  GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




  COPYRIGHT, 1913
  BY GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




TO THE MEN OF THE UPPER ROOM


... AND THIS IS THE STORY I TOLD YOU THROUGH THE SEVERAL NIGHTS:
OF THE MAN WHO CAME UP THROUGH THE DARK AND THE FIGHTING (OFTEN IN
SUCH A RUCK OF FIGHTING THAT HE COULDN’T HEAR VOICES); HOW HE WAS
PUNISHED BY MEN, BROKEN BY SELF, AND HEALED BY A WOMAN; INDEED, BUT
FOR HER, HE MIGHT HAVE CHOSEN THE LONG WAY OF THE BRUTE TO PUT ON HIS
POWERS AND ATTAIN THE CERTAIN ROYALTY OF THE HUMAN ADULT IN THIS YEAR
OF OUR LORD. SHE PAID THE PRICE; SHE WAS THE MAN-MAKER; SHE SAW THE
WORLD-MAN SHINING AHEAD.... IT IS A STORY OF THE PATH AT OUR FEET, OF
THE COMPASSIONATES WHO DRAW NEAR TO SPEAK, WHEN WE ARE BRAVE ENOUGH
TO LISTEN, OF THE WOMEN WHO WALK BESIDE US. A TALE OF THE ROAD AS WE
GO--MANY ARE AHEAD, MANY BEHIND--BUT WE DO NOT TRAVEL THIS STRETCH
AGAIN.

                                                  --_W. L. C._




KAO LIANG


_No one thought of kao liang._

_Morning did not mention it in his great story; even Duke Fallows did
not think of it._

_Kao liang, the millet of China. Inland seas of it are there, green
in the beginning of its flow, dull gold in its high tide._

_A ruffianly scouring grain. Rice is its little white sister. Millet
is the strength of the beast, the mash of the world’s poor. A hundred
millions of acres of Asia are in yield or waiting for kao liang to-day.
Remember the poor._

_In Manchuria kao liang grows strong and high. Its fox-tails brush
the brows of the tall Chinese of the north country. It brushed the caps
of the Russian soldiers one certain Fall._

_The Censurer came with the planting in that year. Kao liang was
like a soft green mould upon the hills and valleys when he came
to his battle-fields. He was watching for a browner harvest and a
ruddier planting. Fall plowing and red planting--for that, he came to
Liaoyang._

_His soldiers trampled it, devastated the young grain with their
formations, foraged their beasts upon it. Yet the millet grew, hardened
and covered the earth--for the poor must be served. Out of flood and
gale and burning, it waxed great, filling the hills and the hollows,
closing in on the city, climbing thinly to the Passes._

_Its protest to the invasion was mute as China’s, but it did not
run. Before the Japanese, it closed in. It was ripe when the brown
flanker crossed the Taitse. It was ripe when two Slav chiefs took
their thousands forth to form the anvil upon which the flanker was
to be broken. The Cossacks had been feeding their beasts upon it for
many days, and they drank in the deep hollows where the roots of
kao liang held the rain. It was ripe for the world’s poor, when the
Sentimentalist strode forth at last--the hammer that was to break the
spine of the flanker._




CONTENTS


  BOOK ONE
                           PAGE
  AFIELD                      1

  BOOK TWO
  THE HILL-CABIN            115

  BOOK THREE
  THE BARE-HEADED MAN       239




BOOK I.

AFIELD


                                   1

THE town of Rosario was ahead. The cavalry expected to sup
and sleep there. Chance of firing presently from the natives was
pure routine. John Morning, back in the second troop, on the horse
of a missing soldier, wondered if years of service and exploration
would make him ever as great a correspondent as Mr. Reever Kennard
looked. The wide, sloping shoulders of the Personage were to be seen
occasionally when the trail crooked, far forward and near the General.

The bit of fighting was over before the rear troopers got rightly into
the skirmish-line (every fourth trooper holding four horses); and
now the men breathed and smoked cigarettes in one more Luzon town;
and another _Alcalde’s_ house was turned into headquarters....
This was a brigade expedition of December, 1899. Two weeks before the
General had ridden out of Manila. Various pieces of infantry had been
left to garrison the many towns which would not stay held without pins.
Two or three days more, then Batangas, and the big ride was over, the
lower Luzon incision complete, and drainage established.

Morning, with the troopers, had to look to his mount in regulation
fashion, and did not reach Headquarters until after the others. The
_Alcalde’s_ house in Rosario as usual stood large among the
straw-thatched bamboo huts. The little upper room which Morning had
come to expect through the courtesy of the staff, was easily found.
The saddle-bags and blanket-rolls of Mr. Kennard and his companion,
a civilian, named Calvert were already there, each in a corner.
Morning’s thought was that he would hear these men talk after supper.
In a third corner he placed his canteen, and shyly tucked away in the
shadow, the limp haversack.

There was a small table in the room, of black wood worn shiny by the
hands of the house, as the black wood of the floors was worn shiny by
the bare feet of servants. Upon the table was a small sheath-knife, the
brass handle of which was inscribed _Mio Amigo_.

It becomes necessary to explain that the human male is discriminating
about his loot, by the time he has been afield two weeks in a tropical
island, especially if he has camped in a fresh town every night. The
day’s march makes him value every pound that he can throw away, for
he has already been chafed by each essential button and buckle. A tin
pail of silver pesos unearthed in a church had passed from hand to
hand among the soldiers. As the stress of the days increased (and the
artificial sense of values narrowed to the fundamentals such as food
and tobacco and sleep), Morning had observed with curious approval that
the silver hoard leaked out of the command entirely--to return to the
natives for further offerings to the priests.

So the knife on the table aroused no desire. It was not even a good
knife, but _Mio Amigo_ took his eye, as if affording a bit of
insight to the native mind. It could not have been wanted by Mr.
Kennard or Mr. Calvert, since it lay upon the table. Morning put it
in his coat, knowing he would toss it away before to-morrow’s sun
was high. In his hot moist hand the brass-handle sent up a smell of
verdigris. A little later in the village road, he encountered Mr.
Reever Kennard in the act of purchasing ancient canned stuff from a
native-woman, too lame to run before the cavalry. Morning was not
natural in the Presence.

The great man was broad and round and thick. He criticised generals
afield, and in Washington when times were dry. He had dined with the
President and signed the interview. His head dropped forward slightly,
his chin sunk in its own cushions. He bought the native wares with the
air of a man who is keeping a city in suspense, and the city deserves
it. Morning stood by and did not speak. There was no reason for him to
stay; he did not expect companionship; he had nothing to say; no money
with which to buy food--and yet, having established himself there, he
could not withdraw without remark of some kind. At least he felt this;
also he felt cruelly the cub. He was at home in this service with
packers and enlisted men, but always as now, officers, and others of
his own work, made him feel the upstart.

Mr. Kennard now turned to perceive him, his eyes opening in the “Bless
me--what sort is this?” manner of the straying Englishman; and John
Morning, quite in a funk, fell to enforcing an absurd interest in the
native sheath-knife. Kennard was not drawn to such a slight affair,
but perceiving the menial in Morning, allowed him to carry some of his
purchases back to Headquarters.

Supper was a serious matter to the boy. He had no money nor provisions.
In the usual case, money would have been no good--but there were a few
things left in the shop of the lame woman. The field ration was light;
and while he would not go hungry if the staff-officers knew, it was a
delicate matter to make known his grubless state. Morning rambled over
the town, after helping Mr. Kennard to quarters, and returned empty to
the upper room. Mr. Calvert was there and appeared to see Morning for
the first time. Calvert was a slender quiet chap, and believed in what
he had to say.

“Where did you get that little sheath-knife you showed Mr. Kennard?” he
asked abruptly.

Morning sickened before the man’s eyes. His life had been fought out in
dark, rough places. He was as near twenty as twenty-five. He had the
way of the under-dog, who does not expect to be believed, looking for
the worst of it, whether guilty or not. He told Calvert he had found
the knife on this table.

“I thought I put it in my saddle-bags,” Calvert said.

“You are very welcome to it. The _Mio Amigo_ made me look at it
twice----”

“That’s why I wanted it. Take this for your trouble.”

Calvert placed a bit of paper money on the table between them.

“It was no trouble. I don’t want the money.”

“Take it along. Don’t think of it again.”

Morning didn’t want to appear stubborn. This was the peculiarity of the
episode. The thought of taking the money repelled him. The connection
of the money with supper occurred, but not with the strength of his
dislike to appear perverse or bad-tempered.... He saw all clearly after
he had accepted the paper, but the matter was then closed. He was very
miserable. He had proved his inferiority. The little brush with big men
had been too much for him. He belonged among the enlisted....

He went to the lame woman and bought a bottle of pimientos and a live
chicken. The latter he traded for a can of bacon with a soldier.


                                   2

IMPERIAL HOTEL, Tokyo, early in March, 1904.... The Japanese
war office had finally decided to permit six American correspondents
to accompany each army. The Americans heard the news with gravity.
There were two men for every place. Only three Japanese armies were
in conception at this time. The first six Americans were easily
chosen--names of men that allowed no doubt; and this initial group,
beside being the first to take the field, was elected to act as a
committee to appoint the second and third sets of six--twelve places
and thirty waiting. The work at hand was delicate.

The committee was in session in the room of Mr. Reever Kennard. Five of
the second list had been settled upon when the name of John Morning (of
the Open Market) was brought up. It was Duke Fallows of San Francisco,
who spoke:

“I don’t know John Morning, but I know his stuff. It’s big stuff;
he’s the big man. We’ve gone too far without him already. He has more
right to be on the committee than I. He was here before I was. He has
minded his own business and taken quarters apart. I had no intention of
breaking into the picture this way, but the fact is, I expected John
Morning to go in first on the second list. Now that there is only one
place left, there really can’t be any doubt about the name.”

Mr. Reever Kennard of the _World-News_ now arose and waited for
silence. He got it. The weight of Mr. Reever Kennard was felt in this
room. Everything in it had weight--saddle and leggings of pigskin,
gauntlets, typewriters, cameras, the broadside of riding-breeches,
and a little arsenal of modern inventions which only stop firing upon
formal request. Without his hat, Mr. Reever Kennard was different,
however. Much weight that you granted under the big hat, had left that
arid country for the crowded arteries of neck and jowl and jaw, or,
indeed, for the belted cosmic center itself. He said:

“Mr. Fallows talks wide. This Morning is out on a shoe-string; and
while he may have a bit of force to handle certain kinds of action,
it isn’t altogether luck--his not getting a good berth. The young
man hasn’t made good at home. He hasn’t the money backing to stand
his share of the expense. The War Office suggests that each party of
correspondents employ a sutler----”

Fallows was still standing and broke in:

“I’m interested in that matter of making good at home. I’ve seen the
work of most Americans here, and I believe John Morning to be the best
war-writer sent out from the States. As for the shoe-string, I’ll
furnish his tooth-brush and dinnercoat--if the sutler insists----”

“We understand very clearly the enthusiasm of Mr. Fallows who wants a
second column-man for his paper. Doubtless this Morning is open----”

“I hadn’t thought of it, but certainly the _Western States_ would
profit, if John Morning turned part of his product there. How about
your _World-News_ on that?”

“I favor Mr. Borden for the sixth place in second column,” Kennard said
simply.

“Borden reached Tokyo three weeks after Morning--and never campaigned
before.”

“He’s one of the best of the younger men in New York--a Washington
correspondent of big influence----”

“I have no objection to him, except as one to take the place that
belongs to John Morning. I can’t see him there.”

Kennard looked about him. Morning was not well known, having been
little seen at the _Imperial_ in the last six weeks. Fallows had
not helped him by saying he was the best war-writer sent out from the
States; still in a general way he could not be put aside. Kennard saw
this.

“I wasn’t going to hurt Morning badly, if I could help it,” he said,
“but Mr. Fallows has rather forced it. This Morning isn’t straight. We
caught him stealing a sheath-knife from the saddle-bags of Archibald
Calvert down in Luzon four or five years ago. Morning said he found it
on a table in the room assigned to us. He took money from Calvert for
restoring the knife.”

Fallows laughed at this.

“I can’t believe the story,” he said. “The man who did the stuff I’ve
read, isn’t stealing sheath-knives from another’s saddle-bags.... Oh, I
don’t mean that it didn’t seem true to you, Kennard----”

Kennard had waited for the last, and was not good to look at until it
came. He turned quickly to the others. Borden was chosen.

“You’ve still got a place to fill in the first list,” said Fallows.

The committee was now excited. The five faces turned to the Westerner.

“I repeat, Kennard, that your remarks may be within the letter of
truth, but I wouldn’t campaign in the same army with a man who’d
bring up a thing like that against a boy--and five years afterward.
Understand, I have never spoken a word to John Morning----”

“You’re not giving up your place?” said the committee.

“Exactly.”

“Then you’ll take Borden’s with the second----?”

“I have nothing against Borden. I wouldn’t spoil the chance of a man
already chosen.”

“Then first with the third army,” urged the committee.

“I can do better than that,” said Fallows. “Gentlemen, I thank you, and
beg to withdraw.”


                                   3

JOHN MORNING waved back the rickshaw coolie at the door of the
little Japanese Inn, where he had been having his own way for several
weeks, and walked down the Shiba road toward the _Imperial_ hotel.
He had half-expected to get on the committee, which meant work with the
first army and a quick start; failing in that, he looked for his name
to be called early in the second list, and was on the way now to find
out. Morning shared the passion of the entire company to get afield at
any cost.

Reasoning, however, did not lift his restlessness and apprehension.
He had not been on the spot. He had been unable to afford life at the
_Imperial_; and yet, the costliness of it was not altogether vain,
since the old hotel had become a center of the world in the matter
of war-correspondence. Japan reckoned with it as the point of foreign
civilian force. While his brain could not organize a condition that
would spoil his chance, Morning’s more unerring inner sense warned him
that he was not established, as he walked in the rain.

His name was not posted in any of the three groups. The card blurred
after his first devouring glance, so that he had to read again and a
third time. For a moment he was out of hand--seething, eruptive. Yet
there was nothing to fight....

Corydon Tait, a young Englishman with whom he had often talked and
laughed, was standing by. Tait’s name was not down. Morning controlled
himself to speak courteously.

The Englishman looked beyond him at the card. A chill settled upon
Morning’s self-destructive heat. This was new in his world. In the
momentary misunderstanding, he grasped Tait’s arm.

“Really, old chap, I’d prefer you not to do that,” the other said,
drawing his arm away. “It must be plain that I don’t know you.”

“I thought you were joking,” said Morning.


                                   4

BACK on Shiba Road in the beginning of dusk, he turned to the
native inn. The door slid open before his hand touched the latch; his
figure having been seen through the papered lattice. The proprietor
bowed to the matting and hissed with prolonged seriousness, hissed
in fact until the American had removed and exchanged his shoes for
sandals. The hand-maidens appeared and bowed laughingly. The old
kitchen drudge emerged from her chimney and ogled. The mother of the
house took the place beside her lord on the rostrum-of-the-pencils.
She did not hiss, but it was very clear that the matting under the
white man’s feet was far above her in worthiness.

There was something of this formality with his every entrance. Morning
had felt silly during the first days as he passed through the hedge of
bent backs; the empty cringing and favor-groveling had seemed indecent.
But now (in the dusk of the house before the candles) a faint touch of
healing came from it. They had all served him. He had been fearfully
over-served. They had bothered his work through excessive service--so
many were the hands and so little to do. The women were really happy
to work for him. To-night, a queer gladness clung to their welcome.
He had fallen indeed to sense it. He was starving for reality, for
some holy thing. They had stripped him at the _Imperial_. In his
heart he was trying to make a reality now of this mockery of Japanese
self-extinction.

The bath-boy, wet from steam, with only a loin-cloth about him,
followed Morning to his room. The American was not allowed to bathe
alone; would not have been allowed to undress himself, had he not
insisted upon the privilege. He sat in a tub, three walls of which
were wood and the fourth of iron. Against the outside of the latter,
burned a furious fire of charcoal. For the benefits of this bath, he
was begged to make no haste and to occupy his mind with matters of the
higher life. A moment or two before the water reached a boiling-point,
Morning was allowed to escape. Exceeding pressure of business was
occasionally accepted as precluding the chance of a bath for one day,
but to miss two days in succession, without proving that he had bathed
elsewhere, meant a loss of respect, and a start of household whispering.

He was sick to get back to work, turned to it for restoration and
forgetfulness, as a man to a drug. Moreover, there was need, for he
was on space. Two or three papers in the Mid-west used what he could
write, though he had no holding contracts, and had left Chicago with
such haste to catch a steamer, that there had been no chance to make
an arrangement, whereby these papers might have used the same story
simultaneously. And then, there had been a delay of nearly a day
in Vancouver. This time in Chicago would have been enough for the
establishment of a central office and an agent on percentage, who
could have enlarged his market without limit, and cut down his work
to one letter a day. Instead, he did the same story now, from three
different angles. It had been this way before. With war in the air,
Morning was unable to breathe at home. Off he went, without a return
ticket--tourist cars and dingy second-class steamer passage--but with
a strange confidence in his power to write irresistibly. It was like a
mark--this faith of his in the ability to appeal.

All his life he had lived second-class. To-night he wondered if it
would always be so; if there was not something in the face of John
Morning, something that others saw at once, which placed him instantly
among culls and seconds in the mysterious adjustments of the world.
They had made him feel so at the _Imperial_, before this episode.
Men who didn’t write ten lines a day were there on big incomes; and
others, little older than he, with only two or three fingers of his
ability, on a safe salary and flexible expense account.

The day was brought back to him again and again. The cut of Corydon
Tait had crippled him. He felt it now crawling swiftly along the nerves
of his limbs until it reached his brain, and remaining there coldly
like undigested matter in a sick body. He felt his face queerly. There
was neither fat nor flabbiness upon it. He could feel the bone. His
fingers brushed his mouth, and a sort of burn came to him. It was the
finest thing about John Morning. There was a bit of poetry about it,
a touch of tenderness, finer than strength. Passion was in the mouth,
intensity without intentness, not a trace of the boarish, nor bovine.
It is true you often see the ruin of such a mouth in quiet places where
those of drugs and drinks are served; but you see as well the finished
picture upon the faces of those men lit with world’s service, who have
heard the voice of the human spirit, and are loved by the race, because
they have forgotten how to love themselves.

Morning knew it only as his weakness. It was the symbol to-night of his
failure.... Those at the _Imperial_ had seen it; they had dared to
deny him because of it. The greatest among the war-men were thin-lipped
and sinewy-jawed--the soldier face.... He knew much about war; none had
campaigned more joyously than he. In the midst of peril, courage seemed
altogether obvious and easy; his fearlessness was too natural for him
to be surprised at it, though it surprised others....

The typewriter buzzed on. Wearily he caught up the trend, but the drive
was gone, although there was hardly a lull in the registering of the
keys for two-thirds of a page. Always before, this sort of hackwork had
been done with a dream of the field ahead. His forces fused. He had
been denied a column. His hand brushed across his face and John Morning
was ashamed--ashamed of his poverty, of his work, of his own nature,
which made a tragedy of the cut of Corydon Tait; ashamed of the heat in
his veins from the stimulants he had drunk; ashamed because he had not
instantly demanded his rights at the _Imperial_; ashamed of the
mess of a man he was, a fool of his volition and vitality, commonness
stamped on his every feature.

Morning’s affinity for alcohol was peculiar. He worked with it
successfully. So resilient was his health that he was usually fresh in
the morning. Often he had finished a long evening of work on pretty
good terms with himself, the later pages of copy coming in a cloud of
speed.... The copy-producing seemed to use up the whipping spirit,
rather than himself; at least, he treasured this illusion. The first
bottles of rice-beer lasted the longest.... He recalled now that the
maid-servants had twice heated _sake_ for him at supper; as for
the rice-beer he had been more than ever thirsty to-night. He glanced
into the corner where the bottles were and a sense of uncleanness came
over him--as if his body were flowing with the slow spirit, like a
sea-marsh at high tide.

... He heard the shafts of a rickshaw grate upon the gravel outside.
Amoya had come; it was midnight. He opened the papered lattice. The
runner was bowing by his cart, holding his broad hat with both hands.
Morning covered his machine, put fresh charcoal in the brazier, caught
up his hat and overcoat, and shuffled down the stairway, holding
his slippers on with his toes. The door-boy gave him his shoes and
opened the way to the street. Morning greeted Amoya with a pat on the
shoulder, and climbed into the cart.

“Yoshuwara?” the runner asked.

“No, you shameless ruffian!”

“No?” Amoya squeaked pleasantly.

“No--not--no must do.”

Morning waved his arm, signifying solitary and peaceful enjoyment of
the night air and contemplation of the dark city. These night journeys
had become the cooling features of his day. Amoya was a living marvel,
the rickshaw runner incomparable--tireless, eager, very proud of his
work; too old to be spoiled. He was old; indeed, enough to be Morning’s
father, but his limbs were young, and his great trunk full of power
unabated.

The night was dark, damp, no moon nor star. The cold which was almost
tempted thinly to crust the open drains, was welcome to the man’s
nostrils. Amoya warmed and gathered speed. Up the broad Shiba Road he
sped, past the far dim lights of the highway, past Shiba temple, the
tombs of the Ronins, past the cavalry barracks (by far the best joke on
Japan), and the last of the known land-marks.

Now Morning suffered strange temptations. Few white men who have lived
any time in Japan have escaped. A Japanese house with every creature
comfort was within his resources even now; wholesome food, _sake_,
rice-beer were cheap; excellent service, even such service as Amoya’s
was laughably cheap. Why not sink into this life and quit the agony?...
Why did he think of it as _sinking_ into this life? Why did he
agonize anyway?... There was always a fresh sore on him somewhere.
Surely other men did not burn back and forth every day as he did.

The shame came again. He ordered Amoya back within an hour, left him at
the door of the Inn, drenched with sweat and delighted with his extra
fare.

Morning slid open the door of his room. Nothing could be seen but the
glow of the brazier, yet he knew some one was within.... A series of
mattresses and robes had been taken out from a chest of drawers and
made up on the matting. The women as usual, had waited for him to go
out. He lit the lamp.

A little Japanese maid-servant was curled up asleep at the foot of
his bed. Morning sat down upon the cushion and mused curiously....
It was thus that Naomi had ordered Ruth to steal into the couch at
the feet of Boaz. Ruth had found a home, and was not long allowed to
make herself glad with mere gleanings.... It was this sort of thing
that made Morning hate Japan. In the eyes of the old, limp-backed
Inn-keeper, this child was a woman. He would not have dared to delegate
a mere maid-servant to ply the ancient art with his guest, but there
were extenuations here: the delicacy and subtlety of the little one’s
falling asleep, and the child-like freshness of the offering. It was
this last that stung Morning, because he knew the old Japanese found a
commercial value in this very adolescence.

He had smiled at this child during the day, and asked her
name--Moto-san--and repeated it after her, as one might have done the
name of a child. She had just come in from the fields, reported the
bath-boy who preëmpted any leakage of English whatsoever, and who was
frequently on the verge of being understood.... Her hands showed labor,
and she was not ashen as the Japanese beauties must be, but sweet and
fragrant--and so little.

“It is the same the world over, when they come in from the fields,”
he said. “Good God, she ought to be sleeping with her dolls.... Poor
little bit of a girl in a man’s country ... and they sent you in here
to keep me from night-riding. One cannot complain of hospitality ...
Moto-san... Moto-san....”

She stirred, and snuggled deeper. “She is truly asleep,” he thought.

“Moto-san!” he said softly again.

The girl opened her eyes, which suddenly filled with fright. Morning
patted her shoulder gently. And now she sat up staring at him, and
remembering.

He leaned his head upon his palm and shut his eyes--sign of falling
asleep--then pointed her to the door.... Morning could not tell if
she were pleased. It all seemed very strange to her--her smile was
frightened. He repeated the gesture. She had slid off the bed to the
matting upon her knees, facing him. And now she bowed to the floor, and
backed out so, bowing with frightened smile.... He reflected dismally
that she had lost value for the eye of the Inn-keeper.


                                   5

MORNING’S idea as he reached the _Imperial_ next forenoon
was to call the committee together, or a working part of it, and to
demand why he had been barred from the projected columns.... The
high and ancient lobby was practically empty. It appeared that the
correspondents _de rigeur_ and _en masse_ were posing for a
photograph on the rear balcony, which was reached through the billiard
room. Morning went there and stood by the window while the picture
was taken. It required an hour or more. He was passed and re-passed.
Two or three Americans seemed on the point of asking him to take his
place with the fifty odd war-men, but they checked themselves before
speaking. Morning felt vilely marked. Stamina did not form within him.
He did not realize that something finer than physical courage was
challenged.

He watched the backs of the formation--the squared shoulders, the
planted feet. He knew that in the minds of the posing company,
each was looking at his own. From each individual to his lesser
or greater circle, the finished picture would go. It would be
reproduced in the periodicals which sent these men--“_our special
correspondent_”--designated. Personal friends in each case would
choose their own from the crowd. The little laughing chap in brown
corduroys who arranged the group was the best and bravest man in field
photography. He left the camera now to his assistant, and took place
with the others. Men of twenty campaigns were there. The dim eyes of
a certain little old man had looked upon more of war than any other
living human being. In one brain or another, pictures were coiled from
every campaign around the world during the past forty years. Never
before in history had so many famous war-men gathered together. It
would be a famous picture.... He, John Morning, would hear it in the
future:

“... Why weren’t you in that picture?”

“I sat in the billiard room behind at a window. I had been barred out
of a place among the first three columns. I was under a cloud of some
kind.”

No, that would not be his answer. Various lies occurred.

This little mental activity completed itself without any volition. It
was finished now, like the picture outside--the materials scattering.
The idea of the truth merely appeared through a mental habit of looking
at two sides--a literary habit. It had brought no direct relation to
John Morning. But the lies had brought their direct relation.

He could not remain at his place by the window, now that the fifty came
in for drink and play. He was afraid to demand what evil concerning him
was in the minds of men; afraid something would be uncovered that was
true. He felt the uncleanness of drink upon him, and a moral softening
from years of newspaper work, a training begun in glibness, which does
not recognize the rights of men, but obeys a City Desk. He could not
organize a contending force; and yet loathed the thought of return to
the Japanese Inn. He was not ready to face himself alone.

It had never come to him so stirringly as now--the sense of
_something_ within, utterly weary of imprisonment and forced
companionship with the visible John Morning. His misery was a silent
unswerving shame. A feverish impulse almost controlled him to take
something either to lift him away, or permit him to sink in abandonment
from the area of pain.

He stood near the desk in the lobby. Duke Fallows was coming. The
Californian’s legs, in their worn corduroys, were far too lean for the
big bony knees--a tall man of forty, with tired and sunken eyes and
sunken mouth. Fallows had a reputation. Its strongly drawing side-issue
was his general and encompassing, though fastidious, love of women.
Someone had whispered that even if a man has the heart of a volcano,
its outpouring must be spread rather thin in places to cover all women.
He was out for the _Western States_, not only to show war, but to
show it up. Certainly he loved the under-dog, which is an epigram for
stating that he was an anarchist.

No anarchist could be gentler to meet, nor more terrible to read.
Fallows owned a formidable interest in the _Western States_;
otherwise he would have had to print himself. The rest of that San
Francisco property was just an excellent newspaper. Its effort was
to balance Duke Fallows; sometimes it seemed trying to extinguish
him in order to save itself. It brought sanity and common-sense and
the group-souled observation of affairs, to say nothing of news and
advertising--all to cool the occasional column of this sick man. To
a few, however, on the Pacific Coast, since his new assignment was
announced--the Russo-Japanese war and Duke Fallows meant the same
thing. The majority said: “Watch the _Western States_ boom in
circulation. They are sending Fallows to Asia.”

The two stood together, Fallows looking down. Morning was broad in brow
and shoulder; slender otherwise and of medium height.

“I’m Fallows.”

“Yes.”

The tall man’s eyes turned upward so that only the whites were visible.
He fingered his brow as if to pluck something forth through the bone.

“Come on upstairs.”

Morning followed the large, slow knees. It was less that the knees
wobbled--rather the frailty of the hangings and pinnings. They did
the three high flights and began again, finally drawing up in a broad
roof-room that smelled of new harness and overlooking an especially
hard-packed part of Tokyo, toward the Ginza. Fallows lit the fire that
was ready in the grate and sprawled wearily.

“Where did you study religion, Morning?”

“I didn’t.”

“That’s one way to get it.”

The sound of his own laugh came to Morning’s ears and hurt him.
Fallows’ eyes were shut. There was no trace of a smile around the wan
mouth.

“You’ll likely be more religious before you’re done. I mean many things
by being religious--a man’s inability to lie to himself for one; a
passion for the man who’s down--that’s another.... I’ve read your
stuff. It’s full of religion----”

Now it seemed to Morning as if he had just entered a fascinating
wilderness; apart from this, he saw something about the worn,
distressed mouth of Fallows that made him think of himself last night.
There was one more effect from this first brush. Something happened in
Morning’s mind with that sentence about the inability to lie to one’s
self. It was like a shot in the midst of a flock of quails. A pair of
birds was down, but the rest of the flock was off and away, like the
fragments of an explosive.

“I read some of your stuff about the Filipino woman--‘woman of the
river-banks,’ you called her. Another time you looked into a nipa-shack
where an old man was dying of _beri-beri_, and an old woman sat at
bay at the door----”

These brought back the pictures to Morning, and the dimension behind
the actual light and shade and matter. The healing, too, was that
someone had seen his work, and seen from it all that he saw,--the
artist’s true aliment, which praise of the many cannot furnish. It gave
him heart like an answer to prayer, because he had been very needful.

“You must have come up hard. Did you, boy?” Fallows asked after a
moment.

“Perhaps you would say so.”

“Farm first?”

“Yes----”

“And a father who misunderstood?”

“A good deal of the misunderstanding was my own bull-headedness, I see
now----”

“And the mother, John Morning?”

“I was too little----”

“Ah----”

Morning found himself saying eagerly a little later:

“And then the city streets--selling newspapers, errands, sick all the
time, though I didn’t know it. Then I got to the horses.... I found
something in the stables good for me. I liked horses so well that it
hurt. I learned to sleep nights and eat regularly--but read so much
rot. Still, it was all right to be a stable-boy. A big race-horse
man took me on to ship with stock. I’ve been all over America by
freight with the racers--from track to track. I used to let the tramps
ride, but they were dangerous--especially the young ones. I had to
stay awake. An old tramp could come in anytime--and go to sleep--but
younger ones are bad. They beat you up for a few dimes. I was bad,
too, bad as hell.... And then I rode--there was money, but it went. I
got sick keeping light. The pounds over a hundred beat me out of the
game--except the jumps. I’ve ridden the jumpers in England, too--been
all broken up. In a fall you can’t always get clear.... All this was
before I was eighteen--it was my kind of education.”

“I like it,” said Fallows.

“One night in New York I heard a newspaper man talk.... It was in a
back-room bar on Sixth avenue. I see now he was a bit broken down. He
looked to me then all that was splendid and sophisticated. I wanted to
be like him----”

Fallows bent forward, his face tender as a father’s. “You poor little
chap,” he said, as if he did not see Morning now, but the listening boy
in the back-room bar.

“You see, I never really got the idea of having money--it went so
quickly. The idea of a big bundle didn’t get a chance to sink in.
I’ve had several hundred dollars at once from riding--but the next
day’s races, or the next, got it. What I’m trying to say is--winnings
didn’t seem to belong to me. Poverty was a habit. I always think yet
in nickels and dimes. I seem to belong--steerage. It wasn’t long after
I listened to that reporter, that I got a newspaper job, chasing
pictures. A year after that the wars began. I went out first on my
own hook; in fact, I think you’d call it that now. I seem to get into
a sort of mania to be off--when the papers begin to report trouble. I
didn’t know I was poorly fixed this time, until here in Tokyo I saw how
the others go about it. Dinner-clothes, and all sorts of money invested
in them--whether the war makes good or not----”

“I was right,” Fallows said finally. He had listened as a forest in a
drouth listens for rain.

Morning was embarrassed. He had been caught in the current of the
other’s listening. It was not his way at all to talk so much. He wasn’t
tamed altogether; and then he had been extra hurt by the night and the
day. An element of savagery arose, with the suspicion that Fallows
might be making fun of him.

“What were you right about, Mr. Fallows?”

“You’ve got an especial guardian.”

Morning waited. The fuel was crackling. The Californian watched the
fire and finally began to talk.

“You’re _one of them_. I saw it in your stuff. Then they told me
here that you lived in a little Japanese hotel alone. That’s another
reason. Your kind come up alone--always alone. To-day I saw you
watching that picture business. You looked tired--as if you had a long
way yet to swim against the current. You had a fight on--inside and
out. You’ll keep on fighting inside, long after the world outside has
called a truce. When you’re as old as I am--maybe before--you’ll have
peace inside and out.”

Morning was bewildered; and had somewhat braced himself in scepticism,
as if the other were reading a fortune out of a cup.

“You’re one of them, and you’ve got a guardian--greater than ten of
these militia press-agents. You don’t know it yet, but your stuff shows
it; your life shows it. You try to do what _you_ want--and you’re
forced to do better. You’ll be kept steerage, as you call it,--kept
down among men--until you see that it’s the place for a white man
to be, and that all these other things--dinner-coats and expense
accounts--are but tricks to cover a weakness. You’ll be held down among
men until you love them, and would be sick away from service with them.
You won’t be able to rest unless you’re helping. You’ll choke when you
say ‘Brother.’ You’ll answer their misery and cry from your sleep, ‘I’m
coming.’ You hear them with your soul now, but the brain won’t listen
yet. You’ll go it blind for the under-dog--and find out afterwards that
you were immortally right.”

Morning’s breast was burning. It was more the fiery flood of kindness
than the words. He had been roughed so thoroughly that he couldn’t take
words; he needed a sign.

“The time will come when you’ll hear your soul saying, ‘Get down among
men, John, and help.’ You’ll jump. A storm of hell will follow you if
you don’t. They’ll throw you overboard and even the whale won’t stomach
you if you don’t. ‘Get down among men, John’; that’s your orders to
Nineveh.”

The Californian changed the subject abruptly:

“They were good enough to give me a place with the first column, but
I can’t see it quite. There’s going to be too much supervision. These
Japanese are rivet-headed. I like the other end. New Chwang is still
open. Lowenkampf is in command there. I knew him years ago in Vienna.
Good man for a soldier--old Lowenkampf. He’ll take us in. Let’s go
over----”

“I won’t be exactly ‘healed’ for a long stay. My money is coming
here----”

“Let it pile up. I’ll stake you for the Russian picnic.”

Morning wanted it so intensely that he feared Duke Fallows might die
before they got to Lowenkampf and New Chwang.... He was terrorized by
this thought: “Fallows has somehow failed to understand about me not
getting a column, and not being asked into the picture. When he finds
out, he’ll change his mind....”

He wanted to speak, gathered strength with violent effort, but Fallows
just now was restlessly eager to go below.


                                   6

SECOND class, that night, on the Pacific liner _Manchuria_, forward
among the rough wooden bunks, eating from tin-plates.... It had been
Morning’s suggestion. Fallows had accepted it laughingly, but as a good
omen.

“Two can travel cheaply as one,” he said. “I’m quite as comfortable as
usual.”

Morning realized that his friend was not comfortable at best. He was
too well himself, too ambitious, quite to realize the other’s illness.
Morning found a quality of understanding that he had expected vaguely
to find sometime from some girl, but he could not return the gift in
kind, nor right sympathy for the big man’s weakness. Fallow’s didn’t
appear to expect it.

They left the _Manchuria_ at Nagasaki, after the Inland Sea
passage, found a small ship for Tientsin direct; also a leftover winter
storm on the Yellow Sea. Morning, at work, typewriter on his knees,
looked up one night as they neared the mouth of the Pei-ho. An oil-lamp
swung above them smokily; the tired ship still creaked and wallowed in
the gale. Fallows has been regarding him thoughtfully from time to time.

“You keep bolstering me up, Duke, and I don’t seem to help you any,”
Morning said. “Night and day, I worry you with the drum of this
machine--when you’re too sick to work; and here you are traveling like
a tramp for me. I’m used to it, but it makes you worse. You staked me
and made possible a bit of real work this campaign--why won’t you let
me do some stuff for you?”

“Don’t you worry about what I’ve done--that’s particularly my affair.
Call it a gamble. Perhaps I chose you as a man chooses his place to
build a house....”

Morning wondered at times if the other was not half dead with longing
for a woman.... In the fifteen years which separated the two men in age
lay all the difference between a soldier and an artist. Morning had to
grant finally that the Californian had no abiding interest in the war
they were out to cover; and this was so foreign that the rift could not
be bridged entirely.

“War--why, I love the thought!” Fallows exclaimed. “The fight’s the
thing--but this isn’t it. This is just a big butchery of the blind. The
Japanese aren’t sweet in this passion. We won’t see the real Russia
out here in Asia. Real Russia is against all this looting and lusting.
Real Russia is at home singing, writing, giving itself to be hanged.
Real Russia is glad to die for a dream. This soldier Russia isn’t ready
to die. Just a stir in the old torpor of decadence--this Russia we’re
going to. You’ll see it--its stench rising.... I want the other war.
I want to live to fight in the other war, when the under-dog of this
world--the under-dog of Russia and England and America, runs no more,
cowers no more--but stops, turns to fight to the death. I want the
barricades, the children fired with the spirit, women coming down to
the ruck, the girls from the factories, harlots from the slums. The
women won’t stay at home in the war I mean--and you and I, John, must
be there,--to die every morning----”

Yet Fallows didn’t write this. He lay on his back dreaming about it.
Always the women came into his thoughts. Morning held hard to the game
at hand.... Lying on his back--thus the Californian became identified
in his mind. And strange berths they found, none stranger than the
one at last in the unspeakable Chinese hotel at New Chwang. Morning
remembered the date--4/4/’04--for he put it down in the black notebook,
after smashing a centipede on the wall with it. They were awakened the
next morning by the passing of a brigade of Russian infantry in full
song. Each looking for “good-morning” in the eyes of the other, found
that and tears.

The Chinese house stirred galvanically at mid-day--from the farthest
chicken-coop to the guest-chamber of the most revered. Lowenkampf,
commanding the port, in sky-blue uniform, entered with his orderly and
embraced a certain sick man lying on a rough bench, between his own
blankets. It was just so and not otherwise, nor were the “European”
strangers of distinguished appearance. They had come in the night,
crossing the river in a junk, instead of waiting for the Liao-launch.
They had not sought the Manchurian hotel, where Europeans of quality
usually go, but had asked for native quartering. So rarely had this
happened, that the tradition was forgotten in New Chwang about angels
appearing unheralded.

It was a great thing to John Morning, this coming of General
Lowenkampf. He had not dared to trust altogether in the high friend
of Duke Fallows--nor even in finding such a friend in New Chwang. The
actual fact meant that they would not be sent out of the zone of war,
when the Russians evacuated from New Chwang, if Lowenkampf could help
it; and who could help it if not the commander of the garrison? It
meant, too, that everything Duke Fallows had said in his quiet and
unadorned way when speaking of purely mundane affairs had turned out
true.

Fallows sat up in his bunk to receive the embrace he knew was coming.
The General was a small man. He must have been fifty. He appeared a
tired father,--the father who puts his hands to his ears and looks
terrified when his children approach, but who loves them with secret
fury and prays for them in their beds at night. He had suffered; he
had a readiness to tears; he needed much brandy at this particular
interval, as if his day had not begun well. He spoke of the battle
of the Yalu and his tears were positive. It was a mistake, a hideous
mistake. He said this in English, and with the frightened intensity of
a woman whose lover has died misunderstanding her.... No, they were not
to stay at New Chwang.... He would make them comfortable.... Yes, he
had married a woman six years ago.... It murders the soldier in a man
to marry a woman and find her like other women. You may think on the
mystery of childbirth a whole life--but when your own woman, in your
own house, brings you a child, it is all different. A thing to be awed
at.... It draws the soldier-pith out of one’s spine, as you draw the
nerve out of a tooth.... You are never the same afterward.

Fallows sank back smiling raptly.

“You’re the same old nervous prince of realizers--Lowenkampf--always
realizing your own affairs with unprecedented realism. God knows, I’m
glad to see you.... John Morning, here is a man who can tell you a
thing you have heard before, in a way that you’ll never forget. It’s
because he only talks about what he has realized for himself. His
name is blown in the fabric of all he says.... Lowenkampf, here’s a
_boy_. I’ve been looking for him, years--ever since I found my own
failure inevitable. John Morning--Lowenkampf, the General. If you both
live to get back to your babies--Morning’s are still in the sky, their
dawn is not yet--you will remember this day--for it is a significant
Trinity.... General, how many babies have you?”

“Oh, my God--one!”

Fallows seemed unspeakably pleased with that excited remark. Lowenkampf
glanced at the shut eyes of his old friend, and then out of the window
to the sordid Chinese street, where the Russian soldiers moved to and
fro in the unwieldy disquiet of a stage mob in its first formation.

“But they’re all my babies----”

John Morning had a vision of a battle with that sentence. All the rest
of the day he thrilled with it. Work was so pure in his heart from
the vision, that he left his machine that night (Duke Fallows seemed
asleep) and touched the brow of his friend....


                                   7

AUGUST--Liaoyang, the enemy closing in.... There were times
when John Morning doubted if he had ever been away from the sick man,
Duke Fallows, and the crowds of Russian soldiery. Individually the days
were long. Often in mid-afternoon, he stopped to think if some voice or
picture of to-day’s dawning did not belong to yesterday or last week.
Yet routine settled upon all that was past, and the days accumulated
into a quantity of weeks that grew like the continual miracle of a hard
man’s savings.

Always he missed something. He was hard in health, but felt white
nowhere, in nor out, so much had he been played upon by sun and wind
and dust. The Russian officers were continually asking him to try
new horses--the roughest of the untamed purchases brought in by the
Chinese. It had become quite the custom among the officers to advise
with Morning on matters of horse-flesh. Fallows had started it by
telling Lowenkampf that Morning formerly rode the jumpers in England,
but the younger man had since earned his reputation in the Russian post.

A sorrel mare had appeared in the city. Rat-tailed and Roman-nosed she
was, and covered with wounds. They had tried to ride her in from the
Hun. Her skin was like satin and she had not been saddled decently.
Just a wild, head-strong young mare in the beginning, but bad handling
had made her a mankiller. Lieutenant Luban, soft with vodka and
cigarettes, had dickered for the mare, and drunkenly insisted upon
mounting at once. Morning caught the bridle after the first fight, and
Luban slid off in his arms in a state of collapse. Clearly an adult
devil lived in the sorrel. She was red-eyed in her rage, past pain, and
walked like a man. She would have gone over backwards with Luban, and
yet she was lovely to Morning’s eye, perfect as a yellow rose. He knew
her sort--the kind that runs to courage and not to hair; the kind of
individual that rarely breeds.

He led her apart, talked to her; knew that she only cared to kill him
and be free. She was outrage; hate was the breath of her nostrils;
but she made Morning forget his work.... Thirty officers were
gathered in the compound. Morning had saddled her afresh; her back
was easier--yet she was up, striking, pawing. He knew she meant to go
back. Stirrup-free, he held her around the neck as she stood poised.
His weight was against her toppling, but sheer deviltry hurled back
her head, breaking the balance. They saw him push the hot yellow neck
from him as she fell. He landed on his feet, facing her from the side,
leaped clear--and then darted forward, catching the bridle-rein before
she straightened her first front leg. Morning was in the saddle before
she was up. Then the whole thing was done over again as perfectly as
one with his hand in repeats a remarkable billiard-shot.

“It’s only a question of time--she’ll kill you,” said Fallows.

“How she hates the Chinese, but she’s the gamest thing in Asia,”
Morning answered. “I’d like to be away alone with her.”

“You’d need a new continent for a romance like that,” Fallows said, and
that night, in their room of Lowenkampf’s headquarters, he resumed the
subject, his eyes lost in the dun ceiling.

“There’s only one name for that sorrel mare, if I’m consulted.”

“Name her,” Morning said.

“The one I’m thinking of--her name is Eve.”

Fallows shivered, and turned the subject, but Morning knew he would
come back.... They heard the sentries on the stone flags below. It
was monotonous as the sound of the river. An east wind had blown all
afternoon. Dust was gritty in the blankets, sore in the rifts of
lip and nostril caused by the long baking wind. Their eyes felt old
in the dry heat. Daily the trains had brought more Russians; daily
more Chinese refugees slipped out behind. Liaoyang was a mass of
soldiery--heavy and weary with soldiers--dull with its single thought
of defense. For fifty or more miles, the southern arc of the circle
about the old walled city was a system of defense--chains of Russian
redoubts, complicated entanglements, hill emplacements and rifle-pits.
Beyond this the Japanese gathered openly and prepared. It seemed as if
the earth itself would scream from the break in the tension when firing
began....

“John--a man must be alone----” Fallows said abruptly.

“That’s one of the first things you told me--and that a man mustn’t lie
to himself.”

“It must be thinking about your romance with that sorrel fiend--that
brings her so close to-night, I mean the real Eve. I had to put the
ocean between us--and yet she comes. Listen, John, when you are dull
and tired after a hard day, you take a drink or two of brandy. You,
especially you, are new and lifted again. That’s what happens to me
when a woman comes into the room....”

Twice before Morning had been on the verge of this, and something
spoiled it. He listened now, for Fallows opened his heart. His eyes
held unblinkingly the dim shadows of the ceiling. The step of the
sentries sank into the big militant silence--and this was revelation:

“God, how generous women are with their treasures! They are devils
because of their great-heartedness. So swift, so eager, so delicate in
their giving. They look up at you, and you are lost. My life has been
gathering a bouquet--and some flowers fade in your hand.... I hated it,
but they looked up so wistfully--and it seemed as if I were rending in
a vacuum.... Always the moment of illusion--that _this_ one is the
last, that here is completion, that peace will come with _this_
fragrance; always their giving is different and very beautiful--and
always the man is deeper in hell for their bestowal.... A day or
a month--man’s incandescence is gone. Brown eyes, blue eyes--face
pale or ruddy--lips passionate or pure--their giving momentary or
immortal--and yet, I could not stay. Always they were hurt--less among
men, less among their sisters, and no strangers to suffering--and
always hell accumulated upon my head.... Then she came. There’s a match
in the world for every man. Her name is Eve. She is the answer of her
sisterhood to such as I.

“She was made so. She will not have me near. And yet with all her
passion and mystery she is calling to me. The rolling Pacific isn’t
broad enough. She has bound me by all that I have given to others, by
all that I have denied others. She was made to match me, and came to
her task full-powered, as the sorrel mare came to corral to-day for
you.... Oh, yes, I honor her.”

There was silence which John Morning could not break. Fallows began to
talk of death--in terms which the other remembered.

“... For the death of the body makes no difference. In the body here we
build our heaven or hell. If we have loved possessions of the earth--we
are weighted with them afterward,--imprisoned among them. If we love
flesh here, we are held like shadows to fleshly men and women, enmeshed
in our own prevailing desire. If our life has been one of giving to
others, of high and holy things--we are at the moment of the body’s
death, like powerful and splendid birds suddenly hearing the mystic
call of the South. Death, it is the great cleansing flight into the
South....”

This from the sick man, was new as the first rustle of Spring to John
Morning; yet within, he seemed long to have been expectant. There was
thrill in the spectacle of the other who had learned by losing....

Morning’s mind was like the beleaguered city--desperate with waiting
and potential disorder, outwardly arrogant, afraid in secret.... Duke
Fallows was thinking of a woman, as he visioned his lost paradise. The
younger man left the lamp-light to go to him, and heard as he leaned
over the cot:

“... Like a lost traveler to the single point of light, John, I shall
go to her. Eve--the one red light--I will glow red in the desire of
her. She is my creation. Out of the desire of my strength she was
created. As they have mastered me in the flesh, this creation of mine
shall master me afterward--with red perpetual mastery.”

Lowenkampf came in. They saw by his eyes that he was more than
ever drawn, in the tension and heart-hunger. He always brought his
intimacies to the Americans. A letter had reached him from Europe in
the morning, but the army had given him no time to think until now. It
was not the letter, but something in it, that reminded him of a story.
So he brought his brandy and the memory:

“... It was two or three evenings before I left Petersburg to come
here. I had followed him about--my little son who is five years. I had
followed him about the house all day. Every little while at some door,
or through some curtain--I would see the mother smiling at us. It was
new to me--for I had been seldom home in the day-time--this playing
with one’s little son through the long day. But God, I knew I was no
longer a soldier. I think the little mother knew. She is braver than
I. She was the soldier--for not a tear did I see all that day.... And
that night I lay down with my little son to talk until he fell asleep.
It was dark in the room, but light was in the hall-way and the door
open.... You see, he is just five--and very pure and fresh.”

Fallows sat up. He was startling in the shadow.

“... For a long time my little man stirred and talked--of riding
horses, when his legs were a little longer, and of many things to do.
He would be a soldier, of course. God pity the little thought. We would
ride together soon--not in front of my saddle, but on a pony of his
own--one that would keep up. I was to take him out to swim ... and we
would walk in the country to see the trees and animals.... My heart
ached for love of him--and I, the soldier, wished there were no Asia
in this world, no Asia, nor any war or torment.... He had seen a gray
pony which he liked, because it had put its head down, as if to listen.
It didn’t wear any straps nor saddle, but came close, as one knowing a
friend, and put its head down--thus the child was speaking to me.

“And I heard her step in the hall--the light, quick step. Her figure
came into the light of the door-way. She looked intently through the
shadows where we lay, her eyelids lifted, and a smile on her lips. Our
little son saw her and this is what he said so drowsily:

“‘We are talking about what we will do--when we get to be men.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

Fallows broke this silence:

“‘When we get to be men.’ Thank you, General. That was good for me....
Our friend John needed that little white cloud, too. I’ve just been
leading him among the wilted primroses.”

Morning did not speak.

Lowenkampf said the fighting would begin around the outer position
to-morrow.... But that had been said before.


                                   8

ON the night of August 31st, for all the planning, the progress of
the battle was not to the Russian liking. All that day the movements
of the Russians had mystified John Morning. The broad bend of the
river to the east of the city had been crowded with troops--seemingly
an aimless change of pastures. He felt that after all his study of the
terrain and its possibilities, the big thing was getting away from
him. When he mentioned this ugly fear to Fallows, the answer was:

“And that’s just what the old man feels.”

Fallows referred to Kuropatkin.

The monster spectacle had blinded Morning. He had to hold hard at times
to keep his rage from finding words in answer to Duke Fallows’ scorn
for the big waiting-panorama which had enthralled him utterly--the
fleeing refugees, singing infantry, the big gun postures, the fluent
cavalry back along the railroad, the armored hills, the whole marvelous
atmosphere.... None of this appeared to matter to Fallows. He had
written little or nothing. God knew why he had come. He would do a
story, of course.... Morning had written a book--the climax of which
would be the battle. He had staked all on the majesty of the story. His
career would be constructed upon it. He would detach himself from all
this and appear suddenly in America--the one man in America who knew
Liaoyang. He would be Liaoyang; his mind the whole picture. He knew the
wall, the Chinese names of the streets, the city and its tenderloin,
where the Cantonese women were held in hideous bondage. He knew the
hills and the river--the rapid treachery of the Taitse. He had watched
the trains come in from Europe with food, horses, guns and men; had
even learned much Russian and some Chinese. He had studied Lowenkampf,
Bilderling, Zarubaieff, Mergenthaler; had looked into the eyes of
Kuropatkin himself....

Duke Fallows said:

“All this is but one idea, John--one dirty little idea multiplied.
Don’t let a couple of hundred thousand soldiers spoil the fact in your
mind. Lowenkampf personally isn’t capable of fighting for himself
on such a rotten basis. Fighting with a stranger on a neighbor’s
property--that’s the situation. Russia says to Old Man China, ‘Go,
take a little airing among your hills. A certain enemy of mine is on
the way here, and I want to kill him from your house. It will be a
dirty job, but it is important to me that he be killed just so. I’ll
clean up the door-step afterward, repair all damages, and live in
your house myself.... And the Japanese have trampled the flowers and
vegetable-beds of the poor old Widow Korea to get here----’”

Thus the Californian took the substance out of the hundred thousand
words Morning had written in the past few months. Dozens of small
articles had been sent out until a fortnight ago through Lowenkampf,
via Shanghai, but the main fiber of each was kept for this great story,
which he meant to sell in one piece in America.

_Kuropatkin_--both Morning and Fallows saw him as the mighty
beam in the world’s eye at this hour. To Morning he was the risen
master of events; to Fallows merely a figure tossed up from the moil.
Morning saw him as the source of power to the weak, as a silencer of
the disputatious and the envious, as the holding selvage to the vast
Russian garment, worn, stained and ready to ravel, the one structure of
hope in a field of infinite failures. Fallows saw him as an integral
part of all this disorder and disruption, one whose vision was
marvelous only in the detection of excuses for himself in the action
of others; whose sorrow was a pose and whose _self_ was far too
imperious for him firmly to grip the throat of a large and vital
obstacle. What Morning called the mystical somberness of the chief,
Fallows called the sullen silence of dim comprehension. Somewhere
between these notations the Commander stood.... They had seen him at
dusk that day. “He seems to be repressing himself by violent effort,”
the younger man whispered.

“What would you say he were repressing, John--his appetite?”

The answer was silence, and late that night, (the Russian force was now
tense and compact as a set spring), Fallows dropped down upon his cot,
saying:

“You think I’m a scoffer, don’t you?”

“You break a man’s point, that’s all----”

“I know--but we’re not to be together always.... Listen, don’t think me
a scoffer, even now. These big, bulky things won’t hold you forever.
Perhaps, if I were a bigger man, I’d keep silent. You’ll write them
well, no doubt about that.... But don’t get into the habit of thinking
me a scoffer. There’s such a lot of finer things to fall for. John,
I wasn’t a scoffer when I first read your stuff--and saw big forces
moving around you.... A man who knows a little about women, knows a
whole lot about men.... To be a famous soldier, John, a man can’t have
any such forces moving around him. He must be an empty back-ground. All
his strength is the compound of meat and eggs and fish; his strength
goes to girth and jowl and fist----”

“You’re a wonderful friend to me, Duke.”

“That’s just what I didn’t want you to say.... There’s no excellence on
my part. Like a good book, I couldn’t riddle you in one reading.”

Morning found himself again, as he wrote on that last night of
preparation; that last night of summer. It was always the way, when
the work came well. It brought him liveableness with himself and
kindness for others. He had his own precious point of view again,
too. He pictured Kuropatkin ... sitting at his desk, harried by his
sovereign, tormented by princes, seeing as no other could see the
weaknesses in the Russian displays of power, and knowing the Japanese
better than any other; the man who had come up from Plevna fighting,
who had written his fightings, who was first to say, “We are not
ready,” and first to gather up the unpreparedness for battle.

Morning felt himself the reporter of the Fates for this great carnage.
He wanted to see the fighting, to miss no phase of it--to know the
mechanics, the results, the speed, the power, weakness and every
rending of this great force. He did not want the morals of it, the evil
spirit behind, but the brute material action. He wanted the literary
Kuropatkin, not a possible reality. He wanted the one hundred thousand
words driven by the one-seeing, master-seeing reporter’s instinct. He
was Russian in hope and aspiration--but absolutely negative in what
was to take place. He wanted the illusion of the service; he saw the
illusion more clearly; so could the public. The illusion bore out every
line of his work so far. To laugh at the essence of the game destroyed
its meaning, and the huge effect he planned to make in America.

Morning was sorry now for having lost during the day the sense of fine
relation with Fallows, but everything he had found admirable--from
toys and sweets to wars and women--the sick man had found futile and
betraying; everything that his own mind found good was waylaid and
diminished by the other. Fallows, in making light of the dramatic
suspense of the city, had struck at the very roots of his ambition. The
work of the night had healed this all, however.

The last night of summer--joyously he ended the big picture. Three
themes ran through entire--Nodzu’s artillery, under which the
Russians were willingly dislodging from the shoulders and slopes of
Pensu-marong; the tread of the Russian sentries below, (a real bit of
Russian bass in the Liaoyang symphony), and the glissando of the rain.

He sat back from his machine at last. There were two hundred and
seventy sheets altogether of thin tough parchment-copy--400 words
to the page, and the whole could be folded into an inside pocket.
It was ready for the battle itself.... All the Morning moods were
in the work--moments of photographic description, of philosophic
calm, instant reversals to glowing idealism--then the thrall of the
spectacle--finally, a touch, just a touch to add age, of Fallows’
scorn. It was newspaper stuff--what was wanted. He had brought his
whole instrument up to concert-pitch to-night. The story was ready for
the bloody artist.

His heart softened emotionally toward Fallows lying on his back over
in the shadows.... Lowenkampf came in for a queer melting moment....
Morning looked affectionately at his little traveling type-mill. It
had never faltered--a hasty, cheap, last-minute purchase in America,
but it had seen him through. It was like a horse one picks up afield,
wears out and never takes home, but thinks of many times in the years
afterward. Good little beast.... And this made him think with a thrill
of Eve, brooding in the dark below.... She was adjusted to a thought in
his mind that had to do with the end of the battle. It was a big-bored,
furious idea. Morning glanced at his watch. Two-fifteen on the morning
of September. He unlaced one shoe, but the idea intervened again and
he moved off in the stirring dream of it. It was three o’clock when he
bent to the other shoe.


                                   9

ALL the next day, Liaoyang was shelled from the south and
southeast; all day Eve shivered and sweated in the smoky turmoil. At
dusk, Morning, to whom the mare was far too precious to be worn out in
halter, rode back to Yentai along the railroad. She operated like a
perfect toy over that twelve miles of beaten turf. The rain ceased for
an hour or two, and the dark warmth of the night seemed to poise her
every spring. The man was electric from her. At the station Morning
learned that Lowenkampf, with thirteen battalions, already had occupied
the lofty coal-fields, ten miles to the east on a stub of the railroad.
He had first supposed the force of Siberians now crowding the station
to be Lowenkampf’s men; instead it was his reserve. Eve had lathered
richly, so that an hour passed before she was cool enough for grain or
water. He rubbed her down, meanwhile, talked to her softly and made
plans. Her eye flashed red at the candle, as he shut the door of the
stable. That night on foot he did the ten miles to the collieries,
joining Fallows and the General at midnight.... Morning was struck with
the look of Lowenkampf’s face. He wasn’t taking a drink that night; his
mouth was old and white. A thin bar of pallor stretched obliquely from
chin to cheek-bone. The chin trembled, too; the eyes were hungerful,
yet so kind. Desperate incongruity somewhere. This man should have been
back in Europe with his neighbors about the fire--his comrade tucked in
up-stairs, the little mother pouring tea. And yet, Lowenkampf--effaced
with his anguish and dreamy-eyed, as if surveying the distance between
his heaven and hell--was the brain of the sledge that was to break the
Flanker’s back-bone to-morrow.

“The Taitse is only ten miles south,” said Fallows, as they turned in.
“Bilderling is there. Kuroki is supposed to poke his nose in between,
and Lowenkampf is to smash it against Bilderling. Mergenthaler’s
Cossacks are here to take the van in the morning, and we’re backed up
by a big body of Siberians, stretching behind to Yentai station----”

“I saw ’em,” said Morning. “Lowenkampf looks sick with strain.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Day appeared, with just the faintest touch of red showing like a broken
bit of glass. Rain-clouds, bursting-heavy, immediately rolled over
it,--a deluge of grays, leisurely stirring with whitish and watery
spots. Though his troops were taking the field, Lowenkampf had not left
his quarters in the big freight _go-down_. Commanders hurried in
and out. Fallows was filling two canteens with diluted tea, when an
old man entered, weeping. It was Colonel Ritz, bent, red-eyed, nearly
seventy, who had been ordered, on account of age and decrepitude, to
remain with the staff. Brokenly, he begged for his command.

“I have always stayed with the line, General. I shall be quick as
another. Don’t keep an old man, who has always stuck to the line--don’t
keep one like that back in time of battle.”

Lowenkampf smiled and embraced him--sending him out with his regiment.

Mergenthaler now came in. There was something icy and hateful about
this Roman-faced giant. His countenance was like a bronze shield--so
small the black eyes, and so wide and high the cheek-bones. For months
his Cossacks had done sensational work--small fighting, far scouting,
desperate service. He despised Lowenkampf; believed he had earned the
right to be the hammer to-day; and, in truth, he had, but Lowenkampf,
who ranked him, had been chosen. Bleak and repulsive with rage, the
Cossack chief made no effort to repress himself. Lowenkampf was
reminded that he had been policing the streets of Liaoyang for weeks,
that his outfit was “fat-heeled and duck-livered.”... More was said
before Mergenthaler stamped out, his jaw set like a stone balcony. It
seemed as if he tore from the heart of Lowenkampf the remnant of its
stamina.... For a moment the three were alone in the head-quarters.
Fallows caught the General by the shoulders and looked down in his face:

“Little Father--you’re the finest and most courageous of them all....
It will be known and proven--what I say, old friend--‘when we get to be
men.’”

The masses of Lowenkampf’s infantry, forming on the heights among the
coal-fields, melted at the outer edges and slid downward. Willingly
the men went. They did not know that this was the day. They had been
fearfully expectant of battle at first--ever since Lake Baikal was
crossed. Battalion after battalion slid off the heights, and were lost
in the queer lanes running through the rocks and low timber below. The
general movement was silent. The rain held off; the air was close and
warm. Lowenkampf, unvaryingly attentive to the two Americans, put them
in charge of Lieutenant Luban, the young staff officer, whom Morning
had caught in his arms from the back of the sorrel. Down the ledges
they went, as the others.

Morning was uneasy, as one who feels he has forgotten something--a
tugging in his mind to go back. He was strongly convinced that
Lowenkampf was unsubstantial in a military way. He could not overcome
the personal element of this dread--as if the General were of his
house, and he knew better than another that he was ill-prepared for the
day’s trial.

Fallows welcomed any disaster. As he had scorned the army in its
waiting, he scorned it now in its strike. He looked very lean and long.
The knees were in corduroy and unstable, but his nerve could not have
been steadier had he been called to a tea-party by Kuroki. As one who
had long since put these things behind him, Fallows appeared; indeed,
as one sportively called out by the younger set, to whom severing the
spine of a flanker was fresh and engrossing business.... Morning choked
with suppressions. Luban talked low and wide. He was in a funk. Both
saw it. Neither would have objected, except that he monopolized their
thoughts with his broken English, and to no effect.

Now they went into the _kao liang_--vast, quiet, enfolding. It
held the heat stale from yesterday. The seasonal rains had filled the
spongy loam at the roots, with much to spare blackening the lower
stems.... For an hour and a half they sunk into the several paths and
lost themselves, Lowenkampf’s untried battalions. The armies of the
world might have vanished so, only to be seen by the birds, moving like
vermin in a hide.... Men began to think of food and drink. The heights
of Yentai, which they had left in bitter hatred so shortly ago, was now
like hills of rest on the long road home. More and more the resistance
of men shrunk in the evil magic of this pressure of grain and sky and
holding earth--a curious, implacable unworldliness it was, that made
the flesh cry out.

“They should have cut this grain,” Luban said for the third time.

Fallows had said it first. Anyone should have seen the ruin of this
advance, unless the end of the millet were reached before the beginning
of battle. They had to recall with effort at last, that there was an
outer world of cities and seas and plains--anything but this hollow
country of silence and fatness.

If you have ever jumped at the sudden drumming of a pneumatic hammer,
as it rivets a bolt against the steel, you have a suggestion of the
nervous shock from that first far machine-gun of Kuroki’s--just
a suggestion, because Lowenkampf’s soldiers at the moment were
suffocating in _kao liang_.... In such a strange and expensive
way, they cut the crops that day.

Morning trod on the tail of the battalion ahead. It had stopped; he
had not. The soldier in front whom he bumped turned slowly around
and looked into his face. The wide, glassy blue eyes then turned to
Fallows, and after resting a curious interval, finally found Luban.

The face was broad and white as lard. Whatever else was in it, there
was no denying the fear, the hate, the cunning--all of a rudimentary
kind. Luban was held by the man’s gaze. The fright in both hearts
sparked in contact. The stupid face of the soldier suddenly reflected
the terror of the officer. And this was the result: The wide-staring
suddenly altered to a squint; the vacant, helpless staring of a
bewildered child turned into the bright activity of a trapped rodent.

Luban had failed in his great instant. His jaw was loose-hinged, his
mouth leaked saliva.

Now Morning and Fallows saw other faces--twenty faces in the grain,
faces searching for the nearest officer. Their eyes roved to Luban;
necks craned among the fox-tails. There was a slow giving of the line,
and bumping contacts from ahead like a string of cars.... Morning
recalled the look of Luban, as he had helped him down from the sorrel.
He had helped then; he hated now. Fallows was better. He plumped the
boy on the shoulder and said laughingly:

“Talk to ’em. Get ’em in hand--quick, Luban--or they’ll be off!”

It was all in ten seconds. The nearest soldiers had seen Luban
fail. Other platoons, doubtless many, formed in similar tableaux
to the same end. A second machine-gun took up the story. It was
far-off, and slightly to the left of the Russian line of advance. The
incomprehensible energy of the thing weakened the Russian column,
although it drew no blood.

A roar ahead from an unseen battalion-officer--the Russian
_Forward_. Luban tried to repeat it, but pitifully. A great beast
rising from the ooze and settling back _against_ the voice--such
was the answer.

The Thought formed. It was the thought of the day. None was too
stupid to catch the spirit of it. Certain it was, and pervading as
the grain. Indeed, it was conceived of _kao liang_. The drum
of the machine-gun, like a file in a tooth, was but its quickener.
It flourished under the ghostly grays and whites of the sky. In the
forward battalions the Thought already clothed itself in action:

To run back--to follow the paths back through the grain--to reach the
decent heights again. And this was but a miniature of the thought that
mastered the whole Russian army in Asia--to go back--to rise from the
ghastly hollows of Asia and turn homeward again.

It leaped like a demon upon the unset volition of the mass.
Full-formed, it arose from the lull. It effected the perfect turning.

Morning saw it, and wanted the source. He had planned too long to
be denied now. The rout was big to handle, but he wanted _the
front_--a glimpse of the actual inimical line. It was not enough
for him to watch the fright and havoc streaming back. Calling a cheery
_adieu_ to Fallows, he bowed against the current--alone obeying
the Russian _Forward_.


                                  10

AT the edge of the trampled lane, often shunted off into the
standing crop, Morning made his way, running when he could.... The
pictures were infinite; a lifetime of pictures; hundreds of faces and
each a picture. Men passed him, heads bowed, arms about their faces,
like figures in the old Dore paintings, running from the wrath of the
Lord. Here and there was pale defiance. Nine sheepish soldiers carried
a single wounded man, the much-handled fallen one looking silly as the
rest.

The utter ghostliness of it all was in Morning’s mind.... Gasping
for breath, after many minutes of running, he sank down to rest.
Soldiers sought to pick him up and carry him back. There were others
who could not live with themselves after the first panic. They fell
out of the retreat to join him. Others stopped to fire--a random
emptying of magazines in the millet. Certain groups huddled when
they saw him--mistaking a civilian for an officer--and covered their
faces. Officers begged, prayed for the men to hold, but the torrent
increased, individuals diving into the thick of the grain and leaking
around behind. White showed beneath the beards, and white lips moved
in prayer. The locked bayonets of the Russians had never seemed so
dreadful as when low-held in the grain.... One beardless boy strode
back jauntily, his lips puckered in a whistle.

The marvelous complexity of common men--this was the sum of all
pictures, and the great realization of John Morning. His soul saw much
that his eyes failed. The day was a marvelous cabinet of gifts--secret
chambers to be opened in after years.

Now he was running low, having entered the zone of fire. He heard the
steel in the grain; stems were snapped by invisible fingers; fox-tails
lopped. He saw the slow leaning of stems half-cut.... Among the fallen,
on a rising slope, men were crawling back; and here and there, bodies
had been cast off, the cloth-covered husks of poor driven peasants.
They had gone back to the soil, these bodies, never really belonging to
the soldiery. It was only when they writhed that John Morning forgot
himself and his work. The art of the dead was consummate.

The grain thinned. He had come to the end of Lowenkampf’s infantry. It
had taken an hour and a half for the command to enter in order; less
than a half-hour to dissipate. The rout had been like a cloud-burst.

And this was the battle. (Morning had to hold fast to the thought.)
Long had he waited for this hour; months he had constructed the army
in his story for this hour of demolition. It was enough to know that
Lowenkampf had failed. Liaoyang, the battle, was lost.... Old Ritz went
by weeping--he had been too old, they said; they had not wanted him to
take his regiment to field. Yet he was perhaps the last to leave the
field. Only his dead remained, and Colonel Ritz was not weeping for
them....

Now Morning saw it was _not_ all over. Before gaining the ridge
swept by Kuroki’s fire, he knew that Mergenthaler was still fighting.
It came to him with the earthy rumble of cavalry. To the left, in a
crevasse under the crest of the ridge, he saw a knot of horses with
empty saddles, and a group of men. Closer to them he crawled, along the
sheltered side of the ridge, until in the midst of Russian officers, he
saw that splendid bruising brute, who had stamped out of headquarters
that morning, draining the heart of Lowenkampf as he went. Mergenthaler
of the Cossacks--designed merely to be the eyes and fingers of the
fighting force; yet unsupported, unbodied as it were, he still held the
ridge.

Kuroki, as yet innocent of the rout, would not otherwise have been
checked. His ponderous infantry was not the sort to be stopped by these
light harriers of the Russian army. The Flanker was watching for the
Hammer, and the Hammer already had been shattered.... Mergenthaler,
cursing, handled his cavalry squadrons to their death, lightly and
perfectly as coins in his palm. Every moment that he stayed the
Japanese, he knew well that he was holding up to the quick scorn of
the world the foot-soldiers of Lowenkampf, whom he hated. His head was
lifted above the rocks to watch the field. His couriers came and went,
slipping up and down through the thicker timber, still farther to the
left.... Morning crawled up nearby until he saw the field--and now
action, more abandoned than he had ever dared to dream:

An uncultivated valley strewn with rocks and low timber. Three columns
of Japanese infantry pouring down from the opposite parallel ridge, all
smoky with the hideous force of the reserve--machine-guns, and a mile
of rifles stretching around to the right. (It was this wing’s firing
that had started the havoc in the grain.)

Three columns of infantry pouring down into the ancient valley, under
the gray stirring sky--brown columns, very even and unhasting--and
below, the Cossacks.

Morning lived in the past ages. He lay between two rocks watching,
having no active sense--but pure receptivity. Time was thrust back....
Three brown dragons crawling down the slopes in the gray day--knights
upon horses formed to slay the dragons.

Out of the sheltering rocks and timber they rode--and chose the central
dragon quite in the classic way. It turned to meet the knights upon
horses--head lifted, neck swollen like the nuchal ribs of the cobra. In
the act of striking it was ridden down, but the knights were falling
upon the smashed head. The mated dragons had attacked from either
side....

It was a fragment, a moving upon the ground,--that company of knights
upon horses,--and the Voice of it, all but deadened by the rifles, came
up spent and pitiful.

Mergenthaler’s thin, high voice was not hushed. He knew how to detach
another outfit from the rocks and timber-thickets, already found by
the Japanese on the ridge, already deluged with fire. Out from the
betraying shelter, the second charge, a new child of disaster, ran
forth to strike Kuroki’s left.... Parts of the film were elided. The
cavalrymen fell away by a terrible magic. Again the point thickened
and drew back, met the charge; again the welter and the thrilling
back-sweep of the Russian fragment.

Morning missed something. His soul was listening for something.... It
was comment from Duke Fallows, so long marking time to events.... He
laughed. He was glad to be free, yet his whole inner life drew back in
loathing from Mergenthaler--as if to rush to his old companion.... And
Mergenthaler turned--the brown high-boned cheeks hung with a smile of
derision. He was climbing far and high on Lowenkampf’s shame.... He
gained the saddle--this hard, huge Egoist, the staff clinging to him,
and over the ridge they went to set more traps.

The wide, rocking shoulders of the General sank into the timber--as he
trotted with his aides down the death-ridden valley. It may have been
the sight of this little party that started a particular machine-gun
on the Japanese right.... The sizable bay the chief rode looked like a
polo-pony under the mighty frame. Morning did not see him fall: only
the plunging bay with an empty saddle; and then when the timber opened
a little, the staff carrying the leader up the trail.

It was the mystery which delayed the Japanese, not Mergenthaler. When
at last Kuroki’s left wing continued to report no aggressive movement
from Bilderling river-ward; and when continued combing in the north
raised nothing but bleak hills and grain-valleys hushed between
showers, he flooded further columns down the ridge, and slew what he
could of the Russian horsemen who tried with absurd heroism to block
his way. At two in the afternoon the Flanker fixed his base among the
very rocks where Morning had lain--and the next position for him to
take was the coal-hills of Yentai. Only the ghosts of the cavalry stood
between--and _kao liang_.

Morning turned back a last time to the fields of millet in the early
dusk. He had been waiting for Mergenthaler to die. The General lay in
the very _go-down_ where he had outraged Lowenkampf that morning;
and now the Japanese were driving the Russians from the position....
Mergenthaler would not die. They carried him to a coal-car, and
soldiers pushed it on to Yentai, the station.

The Japanese were closing in. They were already in the northern heights
contending with Stakelberg; they were stretched out bluffing Bilderling
to the southward. They were locked with Zarubaieff at the southern
front of Liaoyang. They were in the grain.... Cold and soulless Morning
felt, as one who has failed in a great temptation; as one who has lived
to lose, and has not been spared the picture of his own eternal failure.

He looked back a last time at the grain in the closing night. The
Japanese were there, brown men, native to the grain. The great shadowed
field had whipped Lowenkampf and lost the battle. It lay in the dusk
like a woman, trampled, violated, feebly waving. Rain-clouds came with
darkness to cover the nakedness and bleeding.


                                  11

DUKE Fallows saw but one face.... John Morning studied a
thousand, mastered the heroism of the Cossacks, filled his brain with
blood-pictures and the incorrigible mystery of common men. Duke Fallows
saw but one face. In the beauty and purity of its inspiration, he read
a vile secret out of the past. To the very apocalypse of this secret,
he read and understood. The shame of it blackened the heavens for his
eyes, but out of its night and torment came a Voice uttering the hope
of the human spirit for coming days.

Morning had left. Luban had put on bluster and roaring. Their place in
the grain was now broad from trampling; the flight was on in full. It
meant something to Fallows. It was not that he wanted the Japanese to
win the battle; the doings of the Japanese were of little concern to
him. He felt curiously that the Japanese were spiritually estranged
from the white man. Russia was different; he was close to the heart of
the real Russia whose battle was at home. Russia’s purpose in Asia was
black; he was full of scorn for the purpose, but full of love for the
troops. Strange gladness was upon him--as the men broke away. Reality
at home would come from this disaster. He constructed the world’s
battle from it, and sang his song.

One soldier running haltingly for his life looked up to the face of
Luban of the roaring voice--and laughed. Luban turned, and perceived
that Fallows had not missed the laugh of the soldier. This incident,
now closed, was in a way responsible for the next.

... Out of the grain came striding a tall soldier of the ranks. His
beard was black, his eyes very blue. In his eyes was a certain fire
that kindled the nature of Duke Fallows as it had never been kindled
before, not even by the most feminine yielding. The man’s broad
shoulders were thrust back; his face clean of cowardice, clean as the
grain and as open to the sky. His head was erect and bare; he carried
no gun, scorned the pretense of looking for wounded. Had he carried a
dinner-pail, the picture would have been as complete--a good man going
home from a full-testing day.

In that moment Fallows saw more than from the whole line before....
Here was a conscript. He had been taken from his house, forced across
Europe and Asia to this hour. The reverse of his persecutors had set
him free. This freedom was the fire in his eyes.... They had torn him
from his house; they had driven and brutalized him for months. And
now they had come to dreadful disaster. It was such a disaster as a
plain man might have prayed for. He _had_ prayed for it in the
beginning, but in the long, slow gatherings for battle, in the terrible
displays of power, he had lost his faith to pray. Yet the plain man’s
God had answered that early prayer. This was the brightness of the
burning in the blue eyes.

His persecutors had been shamed and undone. He had seen his companions
dissipate, his sergeants run; seen his captains fail to hold. The
great force that had tortured him, that had seemed _the world_
in strength, was now broken before his eyes. Its mighty muscles were
writhing, their strength running down. The love of God was splendid in
the ranker’s heart; the breath of home had come. The turning in the
grain--was a turning homeward.

All this Fallows saw. It was illumination to him--the hour of his great
reception.

Luban, just insulted by the other infantryman, now faced the big,
blithe presence, emerging unhurried from the grain. Luban raised his
voice:

“And what are _you_ sneaking back for?”

“I am not sneaking----”

“Rotten soldier stuff--you should be shot down.”

“I am not a soldier--I am a ploughman.”

“You are here to fight----”

“They forced me to come----”

“Forced you to fight for your Fatherland?”

“This is not my Fatherland, but a strange country----”

“You are here for the Fatherland----”

“I have six children in Russia. The Fatherland is not feeding them. My
field is not ploughed.”

The talk had crackled; it had required but a few seconds; Luban had
done it all for Fallows to see and hear--but Fallows was very far from
observing the pose of that weakling. The Ploughman held him heart and
soul--as did the infallible and instantly unerring truth of his words.
The world’s poor, the world’s degraded, had found its voice.

The man was white with truth, like a priest of Melchizedek.

Luban must have broken altogether. Fallows, listening, watching the
Ploughman with his soul, did not turn.... Now the man’s face changed.
The lips parted strangely, the eyelids lifting. Whiteness wavered
between the eyes of the Ploughman and the eyes of Duke Fallows. Luban’s
pistol crashed and the man fell with a sob.

Fallows was kneeling among the soaked roots of the millet, holding the
soldier in his arms:

“Living God, to die for you--you, who are so straight and so young....
Hear me--don’t go yet--I must have your name, Brother.... Luban did
not know you--he is just a little sick man--he didn’t know you or he
wouldn’t have done this.... Tell me your name ... and the place of
your babes, and their mother.... Oh, be sure they shall be fed--glad
and proud am I to do that easy thing!... You have shown me the Nearer
God.... They shall be fed, and they shall hear! The world, cities and
nations, all who suffer, shall hear what the Ploughman said--the soul
of the Ploughman, who is the hope of the world.... You have spoken for
Russia.... And now rest--rest, Big Brother--you have done your work.”

The soldier looked up to him. There had been pain and wrenching, the
vision of a desolated house. Now, his eyes rested upon the American.
The shadow of death lifted. He saw his brother in the eyes that held
him--his brother, and it seemed, the Son of Man smiled there behind
the tears.... He smiled back like a weary child. Peace came to him,
lustrous from the shadow, for lo! his field was ploughed and children
sang in his house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fallows had not risen from his knees. He was talking to himself:

“... Out of the grain he came--the soul of the Ploughman. And gently
he spoke to us ... and this is the day of the battle. I came to
the battle--and I go to carry his message to the poor--to those who
labor--to Russia and the America of the future. Luban spoke the thought
of the world, but the Ploughman spoke for humanity risen. He spoke for
the women, and for the poor.... Bright he came from the grain--bright
and unafraid--and those shall hear him, who suffer and are heavy-laden.
This is the battle!... And his voice came to me--a great and gracious
voice--for tsars and kings and princes to hear--and I am to carry his
message....”

Luban laughed feebly at last, and Fallows looked up to him.

“You’ll hear him in your passing, Luban, poor lad. You’ll hear him in
your hell. Until you are as simple and as pure as this Ploughman--you
shall hear and see all this again. Though you should hang by the neck
to-night, Luban,--this picture would go out with you. For this is the
hour you killed your Christ.”


                                  12

LOWENKAMPF was the name that meant defeat. Lowenkampf--it was
like the rain that night.... “Lowenkampf started out too soon.”...
Morning heard it. Fallows heard it. The coughing sentries heard it.
The whole dismal swamp of drenched, whipped soldiery heard it. Sleek
History had awakened to grasp it; Kuropatkin had washed his hands....
Lowenkampf had started out too soon that morning. The Siberians had
only left Yentai Station proper when Lowenkampf set forth from the
Coal-heights. Had his supports been in position (very quickly and
clearly the world’s war-experts would see this) the rout in the grain
would have been checked.

As it was, many of Lowenkampf’s soldiers had run the entire ten
miles from the heights to the station, Yentai--after emerging from
_kao-liang_--evading the Siberian supports as they ran, as chaos
flies from order. Now in the darkness (with Kuroki bivouacked upon the
main trophy of the day, the Coal-heights) the shamed battalions of
Lowenkampf re-formed along the main line in the midst of their unused
reserves.

The day had been like a month of fever to Morning, but Duke Fallows
was a younger man, and a stranger that night.... Morning tried to
work, but he was too close to it all, too tired. It was as if he
were trying to tell of a misfortune that had no beginning, and whose
every phase was his own heart’s concern. His weariness was like the
beginning of death--coldness and pervading _ennui_. Against his
will he was gathered in the glowing currents of Duke Fallows--watching,
listening, not pretending even to understand, but borne along. Together
they went in to the General’s private room. Lowenkampf looked up,
gathered himself with difficulty and smiled. Fallows turned to Morning,
asked him to stand by the door, then strode forward and knelt by the
General’s knees. It did not seem extraordinary to Morning--so much was
insane.

“You were chosen, old friend. It has been a big day for the
under-dog----”

“I have lost Liaoyang.”

“That was written.”

“My little boy will hear it in the street. He will hear it in the
school. Before he is a man--he will hear it.”

“I shall take him upon my knee. I shall tell him of you in a way that
he shall never forget. And his mother--I shall tell her----”

Lowenkampf rubbed his eyes.

“I have business in Russia. This day I heard what must be done. It is
almost as if I had gotten to be a man.”

Fallows leaned back laughingly, his arms extended, as if pushing the
other’s knees from him.

Some inner wall broke, and the General wept. Morning put his foot
against the door. The thought in his heart was: “This is something I
cannot write.”...

Morning held the idea coldly now that Fallows was mentally softened
from the strain. Other things came up to support it.... He, too, had
seen a soldier shot by an officer. It was discipline. At best, it was
but one of the thousand pictures. It had happened less because the man
was retiring without a wound--thousands were doing that--than because
the man answered back, when the officer spoke. He did not hear what the
soldier said. This soldier possibly had trans-Baikal children, too. The
day and his long illness had crazed Fallows, now at the knees of the
man who had lost the battle.

“... I know what you thought this morning--when you saw your men march
down into the grain,” Fallows was saying to the General. “You thought
of your little boy and his mother. You thought of the babes and wives
and mothers--of those soldiers of yours whom you were sending to the
front. You didn’t want to send them out. You’re too close to becoming a
man for that. You wondered if you would not have to suffer for sending
them out so--and if this particular suffering would not have to do with
_your_ little boy and his mother----”

“My God, stop, Fallows----”

“You had to think that. You wouldn’t be Lowenkampf if you failed to
think that.... I love you for it, old friend. Big things will come from
Lowenkampf, and from the conscript who came to me out of the grain with
vision and a voice. The battle at home won’t be so hard to win--now
that this is lost.”

There was a challenge and heavy steps on the platform--and one low,
hurried voice.

Lowenkampf stood up and wiped his eyes.

“The Commander----” he whispered.

A pair of captains towered above him, a grizzled colonel behind; then
Morning saw the gray of the short beard, and the dark, dry-burning
of unblinking eyes, fixed upon Lowenkampf.... The latter’s shoulders
drooped a little, and his eyes lowered deprecatingly for just an
instant. Kuropatkin passed in. The soft fullness of his shoulders was
like a woman’s. Fleshly and failing, he looked, from behind.... The
Americans waited outside with the colonel and captains. The door was
shut.

Midnight.... Fallows and Morning had moved in the rain among the
different commands. The army at Yentai seemed to be emerging from
prolonged anæsthesia to find itself missing in part and strangely
disordered. It was afraid to sleep, afraid to think of itself, and
denied drink. Fallows had told everywhere the story of the Ploughman;
just now he helped himself to a bundle of Morning’s Chinese parchment,
and was writing copy in long-hand.

His head was bowed, his eyes expressionless.

“And I alone remain to tell thee!” he muttered at last.

Morning did not answer, but resigned himself to hear more of the
Messiah who came out of the grain.

“I told one of Mergenthaler’s aides the story,” Fallows said coldly.
“He said it was quite the proper thing to do--to shoot down a man
who was leaving the field unwounded. I told Manlewson of the First
Siberians, who replied that the Russians would begin to win battles
when they murdered all such, as unflinchingly and instantly as the
Japanese did, and hospital malingerers as well. I told Bibinoff (who
is Luban’s captain), and he said: ‘That’s the first good thing I ever
heard about Luban.’ He was pleased and epigrammatic....”

Fallows stood up--his face was in shadow, so far beneath was the
odorous lamp.

“Living God--I can’t make them see--I can’t make them see! They’re
all enchanted. Or else I’m dead and this is hell.... They talk about
Country. They talk about making a man stand in a place of sure death
for his Country--in this Twentieth Century--when war has lost its
last vestige of meaning to the man in the ranks, and his Country is a
thing of rottenness and moral desolation! What is the Country to the
man in the ranks? A group of corrupt, inbred undermen who study to
sate themselves--to tickle and soften themselves--with the property
and blood and slavery of the poor.... A good man, a clean man, is torn
from his house to fight, to stand in the fire-pits and die for such
monsters. Suddenly the poor man sees!

“... He came forth from the grain with vision--smiling and unafraid.
He is not afraid to fight, but he has found himself on the wrong side
of the battle. When he fights again it will be for his child, for his
house, for his brother, for his woman, for his soul. Blood in plenty
has he for such a war.... Think of it, John Morning, the Empire was
entrusted to poor little Luban--against this man of vision! He came
forth smiling from the grain. ‘_I do not belong here, my masters.
I was torn away from my woman and children, and I must be home for
the winter ploughing. It is a long way--and I must be off. I am a
ploughman, not a soldier. I belong to my children and my field. My
country does not plough my field--does not feed my children...._
What could Luban do but kill him--little agent of Herod? But the starry
child lives!...

“And listen, John, to-night--you heard them--we heard these fat-necked,
vulture-breasted commanders--vain, envy-poisoned, scandal-mongering
commanders, complaining to each other: ‘See, what stuff has been given
us to win battles with!... I have told it and they cannot see. They
are not even good devils; they are not decent devourers. They have
no humor--that is their deadly sin. An adult, half-human murderer,
seeing his soldiers leave the field, would cry aloud, ‘Hello, you
Innocents--so you have wakened up at last!’ But these cannot see.
Their eyes are stuck together. It is their deadly sin--the sin against
the Holy Ghost--to lack humor to this extent!”

Morning laughed strangely. “Come on to bed, you old anarchist,” he
said, though sleep was far from his own eyes.

“That’s it, John. Anarchy. In the name of Fatherland, Russia murders
a hundred thousand workmen out here in Asia. In answer, a few men and
women gather together in a Petersburg cellar, saying, ‘We are fools,
not heroes. When we fight again it will be for _Our_ Country!’ And
they are anarchists--their cause is Terrorism!”

“We’re all shot to pieces to-night, Duke----”

“We are alive, John. Lowenkampf is alive. But he who spoke to me this
day, who came forth so blithely to die in my arms (his woman sleeps ill
to-night in the midst of her babes), and he is lying out in the rain,
his face turned up to the rain. God damn the fat reptile that calls
itself Fatherland!... But, I say to you, that we’re come nearly to the
end of the prince and pauper business on this planet. The soul of the
Ploughman was heard to-day--as long ago they heard the Soul of the
Carpenter.... He is lying out there in the millet--his face turned up
to the rain. Yet I say to you, John, there’s more life in him this hour
than in his Tsar and all the princes of the blood.”

Fallows covered his face with his hands.

“You’re tired and thick to-night, John, but you are one who must see!”
he finished passionately. “You must help me tell the story to the
cellar gatherings in Petersburg, to the secret meetings in all the
centers of misery, wherever a few are gathered together in the name of
Brotherhood--in New York, London, Paris, and Berlin.... You must help
me to make other men see--help me to tell this thing so that the world
will hear it, and with such power that the world will be unable longer
to lie to itself.

“I can see it now--how Jesus, the Christ, tried to make men see....
That was His Gethsemane--that He could not make men see. I tell you it
is a God’s work--and it came to Jesus, the Christ, at last--‘If they
crucify me, perhaps, a few will see!’... I’m going over to Russia,
John, to learn how to tell them better.”


                                  13

THE night of the third of September, and John Morning is off
for the big adventure. Between the hills, the roads are a-stream....
All day he had watched different phases of the retreat. Fighting back
in the city; fighting here and there along the staggering, burdened,
cruelly-punished line; a sudden breaking-out of fighting in a dozen
places like hidden fires; rain and wounded and seas of mud; the gray
intolerable misery of it all; the sick and the dead--Morning was
glutted with the colossal derangement. And they called it an orderly
retreat.

He was riding the sorrel Eve out of the zone of war. The battle was
behind him now, and he breathed the world again. He had something to
tell. Liaoyang was in his brain. He was off for the ships that sail.
A month--America--the great story.... He felt the manuscript against
him. It was in a Chinese belt, with money for the passage home, tight
against his body, a hundred thousand words done on Chinese parchment
and wrapped in oil-skin. The book of Liaoyang--he had earned it. He had
written it against the warping cynicism of Duke Fallows. On the ship he
could reshape and renew it all into a master-picture.

It had been easier than he thought to break away from Fallows, his
friend. The latter was whelmed in the soul of the Ploughman. A big
story, of course, as Fallows saw it--but there were scores of big
stories. It would ruin it to let an anarchist tell it. Suppose officers
in general did stop to listen to troops sneaking off the field?

Duke had given him a letter, and a story for the _Western States_.
The first was not to be read until he was at sea out from Japan. When
Morning spoke of the money he owed, the other had put the thought
away. Sometime he would call for it if he needed it; it was a trifle
anyway.... It hadn’t been a trifle. It had meant everything.

Morning was glad to breathe himself again. Yet there was an ache in
his heart for Duke Fallows, now off for Europe the western way. He,
Morning, had not done his part. He hadn’t given as he had taken; had
not kept close to Duke Fallows at the last. There was a big score that
money could never settle. Soundly glad to be alone, but in the very
gladness the picture of Duke Fallows returned--lying on his back, in
bunks and berths and beds, staring up at the ceiling, accentuating
his own failures to bring out the hopeful and valorous parts of his
friend. It was always such a picture to Morning, when Fallows came
to mind--staring, dreaming, looking up from his back. It had seemed
sometimes as if he were trying to make of his friend all that he had
failed to be.... Yet the Duke Fallows of the last twenty-four hours,
wild, dithyrambic--had been too much.... Again and again, irked and
heavy with his own limitations, Morning’s brain had seized upon the
weakness of the other, to condone his own slowness of understanding....
It may have been Eve, and her relation to the Fallows revelation, or
it may have been putting hideous militarism behind, that made John
Morning think of Women now as he rode, and a little differently from
ever before.... Certain laughing sentences of Duke Fallows came back to
him presently, with a point he seemed to have missed when they were
uttered:

“We have our devils, John. You have ambition; Lowenkampf has drink;
Mergenthaler has slaughter.... You will love a woman; you already
drink too readily, but Ambition will stand in your house and fight
from room to room at the last--and over the premises to the last
ditch. He’s a grand devil--is Ambition.... My devil, John? Well, it
isn’t the big-jawed male who loves a woman as she dreams to be loved.
It’s the man with a touch of women in him--just enough to begin upon
her mystery.... When I hear a certain woman’s voice, or see a certain
passing figure--something old, very old and wise, stirs within, seems
to stir and thrill with eternal life. And, John, it isn’t low--the
thought. I’d tell you if it were. It isn’t low. It’s as regal as Mother
Nature in a valley, on a long afternoon. It isn’t that I want to hurt
her; it isn’t that I want something she has. Rather, I want all she
has! I want her mind; I want her soul; I want her full animations.
I want to make her yield and give; I want to feel her battle with
herself, not to yield and give.... Oh, the flesh is nothing. It is the
cheapest thing in the world--but her giving, her yielding--it’s like
an ocean tide. It breaks every bond; it laughs at every law. Power
seems to rush into a woman when she yields! That’s the conquest of my
heart--to feel that power.... All devils are young compared to that in
a man’s heart--all but one, and that is the passion to hold spiritual
dominion over other men.”

Morning’s mind had fallen into the habit of allowing much for the
other’s sayings--of accepting much as mere facility.... Thus he thought
as he traveled in the rain, Eve’s swift, springy trot a stimulus to
deep thinking; and always there was a bigger and finer John Morning
shadowing him, fathoming his smallnesses, wondering at his puny
rebellions and vain desires. It was in this fairer John Morning,
so tragically unexpressed during the past few months, that the pang
lived--the pang of parting from his friend.

Morning was terrific physically. The thing he was now doing was as
spectacular a bit of newspaper service as ever correspondent undertook
in Asia; and yet, to John Morning the high light of achievement
fell upon the manuscript, not upon the action. It had not occurred
to him to be afraid. If he could get across the ninety miles to
Koupangtse--through the _Hun huises_, through the Japanese
scouting cavalry, across two large and many smaller yellow rivers--and
reach the railroad, he would quickly get a ship for Japan from
Tientsin or Tongu--and from Japan--_home_.... He was doing it for
himself--passionately and with no sense of splendor.

Fallows had been so sure of his friend’s physical courage, that he made
no point of it, in the expression of attachment.... He had called it
vision at first, this thing that had drawn him to John Morning--a touch
of the poet, a touch of the feminine--others might have called it. No
matter the name, he had seen it, as all artists of the expression of
the inner life recognize it in one another; and Fallows knew well that
where the courage of the soldier ends, the courage of the visionary
begins.

Morning was a trifle peculiar, however. Unless it sank utterly, he
stuck to a ship, until the horizon revealed another sail.

He had come up through the dark. The world had grounded him deeply in
illusion. Most brilliant of promises--even Fallows had not seen him
that first day in too bright a dawn--but he learned hard. And his had
been close fighting--such desperate fighting that one does not hear
voices, and one is too deep in the ruck to see the open distance....
Much as he had been alone--the world had invariably shattered his
silences. Always he had worked--worked, worked furiously, angrily, for
himself.... He was taught so. The world had caught him as a child in
his brief, pitiful tenderness. The world was his Eli. As from sleep, he
had heard Reality calling. He had risen to answer, but the false Eli
had spoken--an Eli that did not teach him truly to listen, nor to say,
when he heard the Voice another time--“Speak, Lord, for thy servant
heareth.”


                                  14

THE Taitse, of large and ancient establishment, runs westward
from Liaoyang for twenty-five miles, and in a well-earned bed, portions
of which are worn in the rock. Morning rode along the north bank,
thus avoiding altogether a crossing of the Taitse, since his journey
continued westward from the point where the river took its southward
bend. From thence it paralleled the Hun in a race to join the Liao. The
main stem of the latter was beyond the Hun, and these two arteries of
Asia broke Morning’s trail. Fording streams of such magnitude was out
of the question, and there was a strong chance of an encounter with the
_Hun huises_ at the ferries....

Rain, and the sorrel’s round hoofs sucked sharply in the clay. She
had no shoes to lose in these drawing vacuums. The scent of her came
up warm and good to the horse-lover. Alone on a road, she had always
been manageable, hating crowds and noise--soldiers, Chinese, and
accoutrements. Perhaps, this was merely a biding of time. Eve had a
fine sense of keeping a strange road. This was not usual, although a
horse travels a familiar road in the darkness better than a man. These
two worked well together.

By map the distance from Liaoyang to Koupangtse was seventy miles.
Morning counted upon ninety, at least. The Manchurian roads are old and
odd as the Oriental mind.... He passed the southward bend of the big
river, and at daybreak reached Chiensen, ten miles beyond, on the Hun.

Chiensen, unavoidable on account of the ferry, was a danger-point.
Japanese cavalry, it was reported, frequently lit there, and the _Hun
huises_ (Chinese river-pirates and thieves in general, whom Alexieff
designated well as “the scourge of Manchuria”) were at base in this
village.... In the gray he found junks, a flat tow and landing.

You never know what Chinese John is going to do. If you have but
little ground of language between you, he will take his own way, on
the pretext of misunderstanding. Morning’s idea was to get across
quickly, without arousing the river-front. He awoke the ferryman,
placing three silver taels in his hand. (He carried silver, enough
native currency to get him to Japan, his passport, and the two large
envelopes Duke Fallows had given him, in the hip-pockets of his riding
breeches.) The ferryman had no thought of making the first crossing
without tea. Morning labored with him, and with seeming effect for a
moment, but the other fell suddenly from grace and aroused his family.
He was not delicate about it. Morning resigned himself to the delay,
and was firmly persuading Eve to be moderate, as she drank from the
river’s edge, when Chinese John suddenly aroused the river population.
Standing well out on the tow-flat, he trumpeted at some comrade of the
night before, apparently no less than a hundred yards up the river.
There were sleepy answers from many junks within range of the voice.
It was the one hateful thing to John Morning--yet to rough it with the
ferryman for his point of view would be the only thing worse.

The landing was rickety; its jointure with the tow-boat imperfect.
The American took off his coat, tossed it over the sorrel’s head,
tying the sleeves under her throat. She stiffened in rebellion, but
as the darkness was as yet little broken by the day, she decided to
accept the situation. Morning felt her growing reluctance, however,
as she traversed the creaking, springy boards. The crevasse between
the landing and the craft was bridged; and the latter, grounded on the
shore-side, did not give. The mare stood in the center of the tow,
sweating and tense.

Numerous Chinese were now abroad--eager, even insistent, to help. Their
voices stirred the mare to her old red-eyed insanity. Morning could
hold himself no longer. Once or twice before in his life this hard,
bright light had come to his brain. Though the exterior light was
imperfect, the ferryman saw the fingers close upon the butt of the gun,
and something of the American’s look. He dropped his tea, sprang to
the junk and pulled up the bamboo-sail. This was used to hold the tow
against the current.

Two natives in the flat-boat stood ready with poles. And now the
ferryman spoke in a surprised and disappointed way as he toiled in
front. He seemed ready to burst into tears; and the two nearer Morning
grunted in majors and minors, according to temperament. The American
considered that it might all be innocent, although the voices were many
from the town-front. Poling began; the tow drew off from the landing.
Clear from the grounding of the shore, the craft sank windily to its
balance in the stream.

This was too much for Eve. Her devil was in the empty saddle. She
leaped up pawing. The two Chinese at the poles dived over side
abruptly. Water splashed Eve’s flanks, and she veered about on her
hind feet--blinded and striking the air in front. The wobble of the
tow now finished her frenzy--and back she went into the stream. The
saddle saved her spine from a gash on the edge of the tow. Morning had
this thought when Eve arose; that he need fear no treachery from the
Chinese; and this as she fell--a queer, cool, laughing thought--that
after such a fall she would never walk like a man again.

He had been forced to drop the bridle, but caught it luckily with
one of the poles as she came up struggling. He beckoned the ferryman
forward, and Eve, swimming and fighting, was towed across. To Morning
it was like one of his adventures back in the days of the race-horse
shipping.

Eve struck the opposite bank--half-strangled from her struggle and the
blind. The day had come. The nameless little town on this side of the
Hun was out to meet him. Had he brought a Korean tiger by a string,
however, he could not have enjoyed more space--as the mare climbed
from the stream. He talked to her and unbound her eyes. Red and deeply
baleful they were. She shook her head and parted her jaws. The circle
of natives widened. Morning straightened the saddle and patted Eve’s
neck softly, talking modestly of her exploit.... Natives were now
hailing from mid-stream, so he leaped into the sticky saddle and guided
the mare out to the main road leading to Tawan on the Liao.... Queerly
enough, just at this instant, he remembered the hands and the lips of
the ferryman--a leper.

Ten miles on the map--he could count thirteen by the road--and then
the Liao crossing.... The mare pounded on until they came to a wild
hollow, rock-strewn, among deserted hills. Morning drew up, cooled his
mount and fed the soaked grain strapped to the saddle since the night
before. Eve was not too cross to eat--nor too tired. She lifted her
head often and drew in the air with the sound of a bubble-pipe.... Just
now Morning noted a wrinkle in his saddle blanket. Hot with dread, he
loosed the girth.

He looked around in terror lest anyone see his own shame and fear. He
had put the saddle on in the dark, but passed his hand between her
back and the cloth. Long ago a trainer had whipped him for a bad bit
of saddling; even at the time he had felt the whipping deserved. He
lifted the saddle. A pink scalded mouth the size of a twenty-five-cent
piece was there.... God, if he could only be whipped now. She was
sensitive as satin; it was only a little wrinkle of the rain-soaked
blanket.... His voice whimpered as he spoke to her.

Only a horseman could have suffered so. He washed the rub, packed soft
lint from a Russian first-aid bandage about to ease the pressure; and
then, since the rain had stopped again, he rubbed her dry and walked
at her head for hours, despairing at last of the town named Tawan.
The Liao was visible before the village itself. Morning shook with
fatigue. He had to gain the saddle for the possible need of swift
action, but the wound beneath never left his mind. It uncentered his
self-confidence--a force badly needed now.

And this was the Liao--the last big river, roughly half-way. The end of
the war-zone, it was, too, but the bright point of peril from _Hun
huises_.... Morning saw the thin masts of the river junks over
the bowl of the hill, their tribute flags flying.... To pass was the
day’s work, to make the ferry with Eve. There was too much misery and
contrition in his heart for him to handle her roughly. The blind could
not be used again. She would connect that with the back-fall into the
Hun. The town was full of voices.


                                  15

CHINESE were gathering. Morning went about his business as if
all were well, but nothing was good to him about the increase of these
hard, quick-handed men. They were almost like Japanese. With the tail
of his eye, he saw shirt signals across the river. The main junk fleet
was opposite. Trouble--he knew it. The hard, bright light was in his
brain.

In the gathering of the natives, Eve was roused afresh. His only way
was to try her without the blind. If she showed fight, he meant to
mount quickly and ride back through the crowd for one of the lower-town
crossings.

Without looking back, he led the way to the landing, holding just the
weight of the bridle-rein. His arm gave with her every hesitation.
To his amazement she consented to try. The tow-craft was larger
here--enough for a bullock-pair and cart--and better fitted to the
landing. Step by step she went with him to her place.

Now Morning saw that in using the blind the first time he had done her
another injury. She would not have gone back into the Hun but for that.
She awed him. Something Fallows had said recurred--about her being
unconquerable, different every day. Also Fallows had said, “She will
kill you at the last....”

He drove back the Chinese, all but two pole-men, that would have
gathered on the tow. This was quietly done, but his inflexibility was
felt. Many signals were sent across, as the tow receded from the shore,
and numbers increased on the opposite bank.

Eve, breathing audibly, swung forward and back with the craft, as it
gave to the river. The towing junk, as in the Hun, held the other
against the current; the rest was poling and paddling.... The junk
itself slipped out of the way as the tow was warped toward the landing.
Other junks were stealing in.... Morning already had paid. He felt the
girth of the saddle, fingered the bridle, tightened his belt. A warm,
gray day, but he was spent and gaunt and cold. Eve was hushed--mulling
her bit softly, trembling with hatred for the Chinese.

The road ascended from the river, through a narrow gorge with rocky
walls. The river-men were woven across the way. While the tow was
yet fifteen feet from the landing, Morning gained the saddle. The
ferry-man gestured frantically that this had never been done before;
that a man’s beast properly should be led across. Morning laughed,
tightened his knees, and at an early instant loosened the bridle-rein,
for the mare to jump. The heavy tow shot back as she cleared the
fissure of stream.

Morning was now caught in the blur of events. The Chinese did not give
way for the mare, as she trotted across the boards to the rocky shore.
Up she went striking. Again he had not known Eve. The back-dive into
the Hun had not cured her. She would walk like a man and pitch back
into Hell--and do it again.... Someone knifed her from the side and she
toppled.

The fall was swift and terrible, for the trail sloped behind. Morning’s
instinct was truer than his brain, but there was no choice of way to
jump. He could not push the mare from him completely to avoid the
cliff. He was half-stunned against the wall, and not clear from the
struggle of her fall. The brain is never able to report this instant
afterward, even though consciousness is not lost. He was struck,
trampled; he felt the cold of the rock against his breast, and the burn
of a knife.

The Chinese struck at him as he rose. The mare was up, facing him, but
dragging him upward, as a dog with a bone. His left hand found the
pistol. He cleared the Chinese from him, emptying the chambers.... Eve
let him come to her. He must have gained the saddle as she swung around
in the narrow gorge to begin her run. The wind rushed coldly across
his breast and abdomen. His shirt had been cut and pulled free. It was
covered with blood. He tried to hold the mare, but either his strength
was gone or she was past feeling the bit. It was her hour. All Morning
could do was to keep the road.

He was all but knocked out. He had mounted as a fighter gets up under
the count--and fights on without exactly knowing. The mare was running
head down. He tried his strength again. The reins were rigid; she had
the bit and meant to end the game.... He loved her wild heart; mourned
for her; called her name; told her of wrongs he had done. Again and
again, the light went from him; sometimes he drooped forward to her
thin, short mane, and clung there, but the heat of her made him ill.
They came into hills, passed tiny villages. It was all strange and
terrible--a hurtling from high heaven.... Eve was like a furnace....

And now she was weaving on the road--running drunkenly, unless his eyes
betrayed.... The rushing wind was cold upon his breast. His coat was
gone; his shirt had been cut. He tried to pull the blood-soaked ends
together. At this moment the blow fell.

These Chinese had been quick-handed, and they knew where to search for
a man’s goods. He was coldly sane in an instant, for the rending of his
whole nature; then came the quick zeal for death--the intolerableness
of living an instant. The wallet--the big story--some hundreds of tales
in paper! It was the passing of these from next his body that had left
him cold.... Fury must have come to his arms. The mare lifted her head
under his sudden attack.

Yes, he could manage her now. The bloody mouth and the blind-mad head
came up to him--her front legs giving like a colt’s. Down they went
together. Morning took his fall limply, with something of supremely
organized indifference, and turned in the mud to the mare.

She was dead. The gray of pearl was in her eyes where red life had
been.... No, she raised herself forward, seemed to be searching for
him, her muzzle sickly relaxed. She could not stir behind. Holding
there for a second--John Morning forgot the big story.

Eve fell again. He crawled to her--tried to lift her head. It was heavy
as a sheet-anchor to his arms.... Her heart had broken. She had died on
her feet--the last rising was but a galvanism.... He looked up into the
gray sky where the clouds stirred sleepily. He wanted to ask something
from something there.... He could not think of what he wanted.... Oh,
yes, his book of Liaoyang.

And now his eye roved over the mare.... Her hind legs were sheeted with
fresh blood and clotted with dry.... Desperately he craned about to see
further. Entrails were protruding from a knife wound. The inner tissues
were not cut, but the opened gash had let them sag horribly. She had
run from Tawan with that wound.... He had worn her to the quick in
night; blinded her for the Hun crossing, when she would have done nobly
with eyes uncovered.... He had not been able to keep her from killing
herself.... John Morning, the horseman.... He had left a gaping wound
in the spirit of Duke Fallows.... All that he had done was failure and
loss; all that he had planned so passionately, so brutally, indeed,
that the needs and the offerings of others had not reached his heart,
because of the iron self-purpose weighed there.

Luban, Lowenkampf, Mergenthaler, even the Commander-in-chief, looked
strangely in through the darkened windows of his mind. The moral
suffocation of the grain-fields surged over him again.... He caught a
glimpse of that last moment in the ravine, but not the taking of the
wallet.... Was it just a dream that a native leaped forward to grasp
his stirrup, and that he leaned down to fire? He seemed to recall the
altered brow.

The pictures came too fast. The sky did not change. The something did
not answer.... Eve was lying in the mud. She looked darker and huddled.
He kissed her face, and as he gained his feet, the thought came
queerly that _he_ might be dead, as she was. He held the thought
of action to his limbs and made them move.

When he could think more clearly, he scorned the pain and protest of
his limbs. He would not be less than Eve. If he were not dead, he would
die straight up, and on the road to Koupangtse.


                                  16

THIRTY-SIX hours after Morning left Eve, an English correspondent
at Shanhaikwan added the following to a long descriptive letter
made up of refugee tales, and the edges and hearsay of the
war-zone:

  Night of Sept. 5.... An American whose name by passport is John
  Morning reached here to-night on the _Chinese Eastern_, having
  left Koupangtse this morning. According to his story, he was with the
  Russians, now in retreat from Liaoyang, on the night of Sept. 3, only
  forty-eight hours from this writing.

  Morning was in an unconscious condition upon arrival. His passage
  had been fourth-class for the journey, and he was packed among the
  coolies and refugees on an open flat-car so crowded that all but the
  desperately fatigued had room only to stand. This white man had fallen
  to the floor of the car, among the bare feet of the surging Oriental
  crowd, beneath their foul garments.

  ... He was lifted forth from the car by the Chinese--a spectacle
  abjectly human, covered with filth; moreover, his body was incredibly
  bruised, his left puttee legging torn by a deep knife-wound that began
  at the knee, and traversed a distance of eight inches downward--the
  whole was gummed and black with blood; another knife-wound in his side
  was in an angry condition, and his clothing was stiffened from flow of
  it.

  A few _taels_ in paper and silver were found upon him; the
  passport, an unopened letter addressed to himself; also a manuscript
  addressed to a San Francisco paper, and to be delivered by John
  Morning. The natives reported that he had reached Koupangtse an hour
  before the arrival of the _Chinese Eastern_; had employed a
  native to buy him fourth-class passage, paying the native also to
  help him aboard. He had collapsed, however, until actually among the
  Chinese on the flat-car. He had tasted neither food nor drink during
  the long day’s journey, nor in Koupangtse during the wait. The natives
  affirm that he crawled part of the distance up to the railway station;
  and that there were no English or Americans there.

  Upon reaching here, Morning was revived with stimulants, his wounds
  bathed and dressed, fresh clothing provided. His extraordinary
  vitality and courage indicate that he will overcome the shocks and
  exhaustion of a journey hardly paralleled anywhere, if his story be
  true. He asserts that he must be on his way to Tientsin to-morrow
  morning--but that, of course, is impossible.... He is not in condition
  to answer questions, although undoubtedly much is in his dazed and
  stricken brain for which the world is at this moment waiting.

  In his half-delirium, Morning seems occupied with the loss of a
  certain sorrel mare. He also reports the loss of his complete story
  of the battle, the preliminary fighting, the generals in character
  sketch, the terrain and all, covering a period of four months up to
  the moment of General Zarubaieff’s withdrawal from the city proper.
  This manuscript, said to contain over a hundred thousand words done on
  Chinese parchment, was in a wallet with the writer’s money, and was
  cut from him in the struggle on the bank of the Liao, when the wounds
  were received. His assailants were doubtless _Hun huises_.

  Whatever can be said about the irrational parts of his story, the
  young man appears to know the story of the battle from the Russian
  standpoint. He brings the peculiar point of view that it was the
  millet that defeated the Russians, although the superiority of the
  Japanese in _morale_, markmanship, fluidity, is well known, etc.

... Morning lay in a decent room at the Rest House in Shanhaikwan.
There seemed an ivory finger in his brain pointing to the sea--to
Japan, to the States. So long as he was walking, riding, entrained,
all was well enough, and the rest was mere body that had to obey--but
when he stopped, the ivory finger grew hot or icy by turns; and as now,
he watched in agony for the day and the departure of the train for
Tientsin.

He would require help. Below the waist he was excruciating wreckage
that for the present would not answer his will.... They were good to
him here. The Chinese coolies had been good to him on the open car....
Lowenkampf, Fallows, good to him--so his thoughts ran--the sorrel
Eve was his own heart’s mate. He loved her running, dying, striking.
She had run until her heart broke. He could not do less. She had run
until she was past pain--he must do that--and go on after that....
Was it still in his brain--the great story? Would it clear and write
itself--the great story?

That was the question. All was well if he could get Liaoyang out in
words. He would do it all over again on the ship. Every day the ship
would be carrying him closer to the States. He was still on schedule.
He would reach America on the first possible ship after the battle of
Liaoyang--possibly, ahead of mails. On the voyage he would re-do the
book--twenty days--five thousand words a day. He might do it better.
It might come up clean out of the journey, the battle itself and the
pictures strengthened, brightened, impregnated with fresh power....
Three weeks--every moment sailing to the States--the first and fastest
ship!... The driving devil in his brain would be at rest. The big story
would clear, as he began to write. The days of labor at first would
change to days of pure instrumentation. He would drive at first--then
the task would drive him.... But he must not miss a possible day to
Japan--to Nagasaki.... He had not money for the passage to America. At
this very moment he could not get out of bed--but these two were mere
pups compared to the wolves he had met....

They found him on the floor drawing on his clothes in the morning--an
hour before the train. His wounds were bleeding, but he laughed at that.

“You see, I’ve got to make it. You’ve been very kind. I’ll heal on the
way--not here. I’ve got the big story. I’ve got to keep moving to think
it out. I can’t think here. I’ll get on--thank you.”

And he was on. That night his train stopped for ten minutes at Tongu,
the town near the Taku Forts, at the mouth of the Pei-ho.... All day
he had considered the chance of getting ship here, without going on
to Tientsin, seventy miles up-river. The larger ships lightered their
traffic from Tongu; he might catch a steamer sailing to-night for
Japan, or at least for Chifu.... It was getting dark.

The face that looked through the barred window at the Englishman in
charge of the station at Tongu unsettled the latter’s evening and many
evenings afterward.

“Is there a ship from the river-mouth to-night?”

Morning repeated his question, and perceived that the agent had dropped
his eyes to the two hands holding the ticket-shelf. Morning’s nails
were tight in the wood; he would wobble if he let go.

“Yes, there’s the little _Tungsheng_. She goes off to-night----”

“For Japan?”

“Yes, but she doesn’t carry passengers--that is--unless the Captain
gives up his quarters, and he has already done that this trip.”

“Deck passengers----”

“Sure, all carry coolies out of here--best freight we have.”

“Do you sell the tickets?”

“Who’s going?”

“My servant.... I won’t go on to Tientsin if I can get--get him on
to-night----”

“The launch and lighter are supposed to be down shortly from
Tientsin--that’s all I can say. It’s blowing a bit. She may not clear.”

“She’ll clear if any does?”

“Yes, Himmelhock has taken her out of here worse than this. You’d
better decide--I’ve got to go out now. The train’s leaving.”

Seventy miles up the river, he thought,--the wrong way if he stuck
to the train. Every mile that ivory finger would torture him. His
brain now seemed holding back an avalanche. If he chose falsely, he
would tumble down the blackness with the rocks and glaciers.... This
Englishman looked a gamester--he might help. Perhaps he wasn’t a corpse.

“I’ll stay,” he said, and the story and all his purpose wobbled and
grew black.... He mustn’t forget. He mustn’t fall.... So he stood there
holding fast to the ticket-shelf, which he could not feel--held and
held, and the train clattered, grew silent, and it was dark.

“Where’s your servant?”

Morning’s lips moved.

“Where is your servant?”

“I am my servant.”

“I can’t give a white man deck passage. It’s not only against the
rules--but against reason.”

Morning groped for his arm. “Take me into the light,” he said.

The man obeyed.

“What day is this?”

“Night of September six.”

“I left Liaoyang the night of the third. I rode a good horse to
death--along the Taitse, over the Hun and the Liao. I rode through the
_Hun huises_ twice. I was all cut up and beaten--the horse went
over backward in the Hun, and in the gut on the bank of the Liao....
I was in Liaoyang for the battle. I was there four months waiting for
the battle. They took my story--hundred thousand words--the _Hun
huises_ did, in the fight on the Liao bank. The horse killed herself
running with me ... but I’ve got it all in my head--the story. I’ll get
to the States with it before any mail--before any other man. It’s all
in my head--the whole Russian-end. I can write it again on the ship to
the States in three weeks.... I’ve got to get off to-night. You’re the
one to help me.... See these----”

Morning opened his shirt and then started to undo his legging.

“For God’s sake--don’t.... But you’ll die on the deck----”

“No, the only way to kill me would be to wall me up--so I couldn’t keep
moving.”

“I’ll go down to the river with you in a few minutes.”

And then he had John Morning sobbing on his shoulder.


                                  17

THE Englishman at Tongu was a small, sallow man, with the face
of one who is used to getting the worst of it. Tongu, as a post, was no
exception from an outsider’s point of view. Morning saw this face in
odd lights during the days that followed. It came to the chamber of
images--and always he wanted to break down, and his hands went out for
the shoulder.... He remembered a pitching junk in the windy blackness
at the mouth of the Pei-ho. (He had seen the low mud-flats of the Taku
forts from here in another service.)... The _Tungsheng_ looked
little--not much bigger than the junk, and she was wooden. There was
chill and a slap of rain in the blackness.

“Hul-lo, who is dere?” The slow, juicy voice came from the door of the
pilot-house.

“Endicott. I’ve got a deck passenger----”

“Huh--dere dick as meggots alretty----”

“This is a kitchen coolie of mine--he must go. Send someone down to
make a place and take his transportation----”

The grumbling that followed was a matter of habit rather than of
effectiveness. Morning seemed to see the lower lip from which the voice
came, a thick and loppy member.... The mate came down, stepping from
shoulder to back, across the complaining natives. They were three deep
on the deck. He kicked clear a hole in the lee of the cabin.... Morning
sank in, and Endicott bent to whisper:

“Put the grub-basket between your knees and don’t take your hands
off it.... Put the blanket over it. It’s a thick, good blanket. I
could give you a better passage, but they wouldn’t take you--honest,
they wouldn’t. If they see you’re white, tell old Himmelhock you’re
Endicott’s house-coolie. He can’t do anything now.... If you live,
write and send the big story to Endicott at Tongu.”

Morning was sinking to sleep. He felt the warmth of the blanket, a
thick, rough blanket Endicott had donated. Its warmth was like the
man’s heart.... Morning’s hands went out. A coolie growled at him....
There was no worry now. It was the night of the sixth, and he was
sailing. He could do no more; the ivory finger in his brain neither
froze nor burned.... The pitching did not rouse him--nor the men
of sewers and fields--sick where they sat--woven, matted together,
trusting to the animal heat of the mass to keep from dying of exposure.
John Morning lay in the midst of them--John Morning whose body would
not die.

The days and nights rushed together....

Sometimes he wondered if he were not back at the shipping--in some
stock-car with the horses--but horses were so clean compared to
this.... When he could think, he put clean lint to his wounds. He
scorned pain, for he was on his way; and much was merciful coma.

There was rain, deluges; and though the air rose heavy as amber
afterward, the freshness at the time was salvation. He learned as it
is probable no other American ever learned, what it means to live in
the muck of men. All one at the beginning and at the ending, it is
marvelous how men separate their lives in the interval--how little they
know of one another, and how easily foolish noses turn up. Here was a
man alive--dreaming of the baths he had missed, of Japanese Inn baths
most of all.

“Who am I?” he asked.... “John Morning,” would whip back to him from
somewhere. “And who in hell is John Morning to revolt at the sufferings
of other men?”

He had seen the coolies in the steerage of many ships--even these
massed deck passages of the Yellow and China Seas and the Coasting
trade. He had looked at them before as one looks into a cage
of animals. Now he was one of those who looked out, one of the
_slumees_. Once he asked, “Is this the bottom of the human drain,
and if not--must I sink to it?”

The Chinese did steal his food that first night, but fed him
occasionally from their own stock. Finding him white, they fouled him,
but kept him warm.... The _Tungsheng_ ran into Chifu harbor to
avoid a storm, and a full day was lost. John Morning had no philosophy
then--a hell-minded male full of sickness--not good to view, even
through the bars of a cage. But at best to sit five hours, where he sat
more than five days and nights, would condemn the mind of any white man
or woman to chaos, or else restore it to the fine sanity of Brotherhood.

And then the day when the breeze turned warm and the Islands were
green!... Coolies were men that hour, men with eyes that melted to
ineffable softness. It was like Jesus coming toward them on the
sea--the green hills of Japan. Their hearts broke with emotion; they
wept and loved one another--this mass all molten and integrated into
one. It was like the Savior coming to meet them through the warm bright
air. He would make them clean; their eyes would follow Him always....

Morning was not the only one who had to be carried ashore at
Shimoneseki, after the quarantine officer had finished with the herd.
His passport saved him. “I had to come. It was the first ship out
of Tongu. Deck passage was the only way they would take me,” was
the simple story. He was fevered, but strangely subdued that day.
Himmelhock was at the door of the pilot-house, when Morning looked up
from the shore a last time, and his native sailors, bare to the thigh,
were sluicing the decks.

The bath was heaven. He was able to walk afterward. The officials
burned his clothing, but made it possible for him to buy a few light
things. The wound in his leg was healing; the bruises fading away. The
wound in his side did not heal; it was angry as a feline mouth.

He had bandages, but no stockings; clean canvas clothing, but no
underwear.... He found that he had to wait before answering when anyone
spoke; and then he was not quite sure if he had answered, and would
try again--until they stopped him. Somewhere long ago there was a
parrot whose eyes were rimmed--with red-brown, and of stony opaqueness.
He couldn’t recall where the parrot was, but it had something to do
with him when he was little, almost beyond memory. His eyes now felt
just as the parrot’s had looked.

It was a night run back to Nagasaki by rail--his thought was of ships,
ships, ships. He could stand off from the world and see the ships--all
the lines of tossing, steaming ships. Then he would go down to the deck
of one--and below and aft where Asiatics were crowded together. To the
darkest and thickest place among them he would go, and there lie and
rest until the finger in his brain roused him. Then he would find that
the train had stopped. It was the halt that awakened him.

There were two ships, all but ready to clear for the States, lying
in the harbor of Nagasaki that morning. The first was the liner
_Coptic_, but she had to go north first, a day at Kobe, and
two days at Yokohama, before taking the long southeastern slide to
Honolulu. She was faster than the American transport, _Sickles_
(with a light load of sick and insane from the Islands), but the latter
was clearing for Honolulu at sundown and would reach San Francisco at
least one day earlier than the liner. Moreover, the _Coptic_ would
have recent mails; the _Sickles_ would beat the mails.

Money was waiting for him at Tokyo, less than an hour’s journey from
Yokohama; he would have good care and a comfortable passage home on the
old liner, but his brain burned at the thought. Four days north--not
homeward.... The _Sickles_ was clipper-built--she was white and
clean-lined, lying out in the harbor, in the midst of black collier
babies. She was off for Home to-night. He had traveled home once before
on a transport. He was American and she--the flag was there, run
together a bit in the vivid light, but the flag was there! And to-night
he would be at sea--pulling himself together for the big story, alone
with the big story--the ship never stopping--unless they stopped in
ocean to drop the dead....

The actual cost of the transport passage is very little, merely a
computation for food and berth; the difficulty is to obtain the
permit. As it was, he had not enough money, barely enough to get up
to Yokohama, second class on the _Coptic_; and yet, this hardly
entered. It was like a home city, this American ship, to one who had
been in the alien heart of the Chinese country so long. He would know
someone, and a telegram from ’Frisco would bring money to him. He had a
mighty reliance from the big story.

The U. S. quartermaster at Nagasaki was a tired old man. He advised
Morning to cable to Manila for permission. Morning did not say that
he lacked money for this, but repeated his wish to go. The old man
thought a minute and then referred him to Ferry, the _Sickles_
quartermaster. He had been doing this for thirty years, referring
others to others so that all matters merely struck and glanced from
him. Thus he kept an open mind. Morning wanted something to take
from this office to Ferry of the _Sickles_. The resistance he
encountered heated him. The smell of the deck-passage was in his
nostrils; it seemed in his veins, and made him afraid that others
caught the taint. The old quartermaster did not help him. Morning could
hear his own voice, but could not hold in mind what he said.... The
officer did not seem to be interested in Liaoyang. This disturbed him.
It made him ask if he had not gone mad after all--if he could be wrong
on this main trend, that he had something the world wanted.

He took a _sampan_ at the harbor-front and went aboard the
transport. Ferry, the _Sickles_ quartermaster, was a tall, lean
man with a shut smile that drooped. The face was a pinched and
diminished Mergenthaler, and brought out the clouds and the manias of
Morning’s mind.

Were all quartermasters the same? What had become of men? Had the world
lost interest in monster heroisms? Ferry did not help him--on the
contrary, stood looking down with the insolence of superior inches.
Morning found himself telling about the sorrel mare. That would not do.
He returned to the main fact that he had the big story and must get
across the Pacific with it.

“I can’t take you----”

Morning heard it, but couldn’t believe. He tried to tell about
the _Hun huises_ and the loss of the manuscript, the walk to
Koupangtse----

“Really--it’s no affair of mine. I can’t take you on.... The
_Coptic_ is sailing----”

And just now Mr. Reever Kennard appeared on the deck. The summer had
added portliness. He was in flannels--a spectacle for children and
animals.... The insignificance of all about was quickened when Mr.
Reever Kennard appeared. The decks were less white, sailors, soldiers
more enlisted. John Morning became an integer of the _Tungsheng’s_
deck-passage again, and the lining of his nostrils retained the reek of
it.

“How do you do, Mr. Kennard?” he said. His back was different. He felt
a leniency there, very new or very ancient, as he turned to Ferry,
adding: “This gentleman knows me. We parted in Tokyo this Spring, when
I went over with the Russians. I met him long ago in the Philippine
service. He will tell you----”

Ferry’s face grew suddenly saturnine, his eyes held in the glance of
the famous correspondent’s.

“You’ll please count it closed--I can’t take you.”

Morning now turned to Kennard, who was sealing with his tongue a little
flap of cigar-wrapper which may have prevented the perfect draught.
Morning bowed and moved aft, where the dust of the coaling was thick,
and the scores of natives, women and men, who handled the baskets, were
a distraction which kept the reality from stifling him. Presently he
went ashore and it was noon.... He could not understand Kennard; could
not believe in an American doing what Ferry had done, to a man who had
the big story of Liaoyang. It was some hideous mistake; he had not been
able to make himself understood.

The _Sickles_ launch was leaving the pier at two. Morning was
there and took a seat. He was holding himself--the avalanche again--and
rehearsing in his mind what he should say to Ferry. His brain was
afire; the wound in his side had scalded him so long that his voice had
a whimper in it. He had not eaten--the thought was repulsive--but he
had bought drink in the thought of clearing his brain and deadening his
hurt....

His brain was clearer on the launch, but the gin fumed out of him as he
approached the upper deck, where Ferry’s quarters were.

The Quartermaster saw him, but was speaking to an infantry captain.
Morning waited by the rail. Many times he thought--if he could only
begin to speak _now_. Yet he feared in his heart when Ferry
turned to him, he would fail. It was something little and testy in the
man--something so different from what he had known in the great strains
of Liaoyang--except for Luban. Yes, Ferry was like Luban, when Luban
was in the presence of a fancied inferior.... They talked on--Morning
thought of murder at last. A peculiar wiry strength gathered about the
idea of murder in its connection with Ferry’s dark, mean face. He felt
all the old strength in his hands, and more from days of pain--days of
holding one’s self--will, body, brain.

“Well----” Ferry had turned to him suddenly.

Morning’s thoughts winged away with a swarm of details of the
crime.... “I could tell you something of the Story--I could show you
how they cut me on the Liao--the _Hun huises_----”

“If you come to this deck again--I’ll send you ashore in irons.”

At four that afternoon Morning saw the _Coptic_ draw up her chains
and slide out of the harbor, with the swift ease of a river-ferry....
He could not count himself whipped on the _Sickles_--and this is
the real beginning of John Morning. He was Fate-driven. The man who
did not have the courage to ask his rights in Tokyo--to inquire the
reason of his disbarment, was not through with the American transport
_Sickles_. A full day ahead of the mails in San Francisco--and he
was waiting for the dusk. The fight had been brought to him. He was
dull to the idea of being whipped.

Three enlisted men were drinking in the little apothecary shop which
Morning had used for the day’s headquarters. They belonged to the
_Sickles_. They had been taking just one more drink for many
minutes. He told them he was sailing on the transport and joined
them in a _sampan_ to the ship when it was dark. The harbor was
still as a dream; the dark blending with the water.... They touched
the bellying white plates of the ship. Morning seemed to come up from
infinite depths.... The men were very drunk; they had ordered rapidly
toward the end; the effect caught up as swiftly now. They helped
each other officiously. Morning put on the fallen hat of one who had
become unconscious.... The watch was of them, a corporal, who was
no trouble-maker. He blustered profusely and hurried them below....
Morning was bewildered. He had spoken no word, but helped the others
carry the body, a wobbly deputation, down among the hammocks.... He
heard the voices of those maimed in mind.... He placed his end of the
soldier’s body down, left his companions, and made his way forward, to
where the hammocks were farther apart. Early years had given him a
sort of enlisted man’s consciousness of things; and he knew now not to
take another’s place. He chose one from a pile of hammocks and slung
it forward, close to the bulk-head of the bedlam, and well out of the
lights.... He lay across his only baggage, a package containing a
thousand sheets of Chinese parchment. He lay rigid, trying to remember
if out-going ships took a pilot out of Nagasaki.

He heard the anchor-chain. He was very close to it. The voices of the
sun-struck and vino-maddened men from the Islands were deadened by the
hideous grating of the links in the socket.... It was not too late for
him to be put ashore even now; since it was war-time. Of course there
would be a pilot, for the harbor was mined.... He drew the canvas about
his ears, but the voices of the brain-dead men reached him.... Cats,
pirates, and river-reptiles terrified them; one man was still lost in
a jungle set with bolo-traps; the emptiness of others was filled by
strange abominations glad of the flesh again.


                                  18

HE had been listening to Duke Fallows for a long time--Duke’s
voice blended with war and storm and a woman’s laugh.... Then he
reverted to the idea of murdering Ferry. Finally someone said:

“He’s a new one from Nagasaki. He’s got the fevers----”

And then:

“Who in hell is he?”

They began to ask questions. Morning answered nothing. Day had come.
He heard the throb of the engines, felt the swell of the sea, but the
strength of yesterday’s concentration was still upon him. It had built
a wall around him, holding the life of his mind there; as a life of low
desires imprisons the spirit to its own vile region after death.... He
did not speak, but looked from face to face for Ferry.

They ceased to expect an answer from him.... A young doctor appeared.
His eyes rolled queerly; his cheek folded over his mouth, as if he were
beyond words from drink, and tremendously pleased with his prowess.
They called him Nevin. He prepared himself profoundly for speech.
Morning now realized the nimbleness of Nevin’s hands, unwinding the
filthy bandages. Presently, the Doctor straightened up, passed his hand
over his brow, tongued the other cheek, and after a sweating suspense
ordered:

“Take him to the hospital.”

A white room.... The Doctor came again. They took his clothing and
bathed him.... He heard and smelled the sea through an open port ...
glad, but utterly weary ... waiting for Ferry.

“My God--not only cut, but trampled----” a voice said.

Morning felt if he were alone with Nevin he could have said
something.... The Doctor looked like a jockey he had once known. It
wasn’t that, however, that gave him heart, but the quick, gentle
hands.... More and more as he watched the dusty face with its ineffable
gravity, he saw bright humanity burning like a forge-fire behind the
mask. This brought tears to his own eyes. Nevin, seeing them, became
altogether nervous to look at, seemed to have a walnut in his mouth.

And now John Morning felt himself breaking--he was brittle, hard like
glass--and his last idea concerned the package of Chinese parchment
which they had not brought from the hammock.... Six days afterward he
asked for it.

For a short while each day, during the interval, he just touched
the main idea and sank back to sleep. He suffered very little. The
after-effects of his journey from Liaoyang tried to murder him in
various ways, but relaxation, nourishment, good air and care worked as
a sort of continuous anæsthesia. On this sixth day the Doctor appeared
to ignore his question about the package of paper, but leaned forward,
glanced to the right and left, as if to communicate a plan to scuttle
the ship, and said:

“You’re one more little man. You’ve had a new one each day--pneumonia,
sclerosis, brain-fever.... My hospital report on your case will drive
the Major-Surgeon into permanent retirement.... What did you say was
the matter to-day--Chinese parchment?”

“I’ve got so much to do, Doctor?... What day is this?”

“Morning of the nineteenth.”

The color swept into Morning’s face, terror into his eyes.

“I didn’t think it was so bad as that--I can’t lay up any more--twelve
days left.... Two weeks and two days since I rode out of Liaoyang----”

“I’ll have to let ’em put you in the forward hutch--if you begin to
talk Liaoyang, now that your fever’s down. There wasn’t any Americans
in that fighting----”

“I’m not a soldier----”

Nevin wrung his hands. A thought recurred to Morning.

“There was a couple of letters in my clothes--one addressed to a paper
in ’Frisco, and one to me.”

The other was curious enough to send an orderly to search.

“Have him bring the package of paper, too,” Morning said. When all was
brought in good order, he added: “This letter to me I’ll read later.
The larger package is Duke Fallows’ first hurried story of the battle
of Liaoyang. I won’t read that either, because I’ve got to do one of
my own. I did one, you know--ten times as long as this--but the _Hun
huises_ got it on the Liao-crossing, from Tawan--that’s where I got
cut up. Morning of the fourth, it was.... The sorrel mare did fifteen
miles with her guts sticking out, and I walked thirty to Koupangtse,
with these wounds and smashed from a couple of falls--before the
morning of the fifth.... You can look at Duke Fallows’ story, Doctor,
and I’ll take a little doze----”

Fallows’ battle was done clearly as a football game, and as briskly,
to the withdrawal of the Russian lines upon the inner positions of the
city and the flanking movement of Kuroki. A dramatic pause then to
survey the Russian force on the eve of disaster, from which the reader
drew the big moral sickness. After that Lowenkampf, the millet and the
Ploughman. In quite a remarkable way Fallows turned the reader now from
the mass to the individual. In a little trampled place in the grain the
battle was lost by the Russians and won by Japan.... The Doctor was
interrupted several times, but no force was missed. It was a new voice
to him. He wondered if Fallows would make the world hear it. It seemed
to compel a reckoning.

The Fallows story laughed all the way. One did not have to look twice
at a sentence to understand, yet two readings did not wear it out, nor
would it leave one alone. All the time the Doctor read, matters he had
heard in delirium from the lips of John Morning came back.

Nevin remembered the tears on the first morning, the choke in his own
throat; the first sight of the wounds, the queer, extra zeal he had put
into this case. Finally he could hardly wait to learn the rest--chiefly
how John Morning had happened to be lying in the darkest end of the
hammock-hole, over against the insane compartment.... Yet he did not
wake up his patient. When Morning finally opened his eyes, it was time
for nourishment. Nevin brought a glass of extra wine before inquiring.
“First, tell me--has Ferry seen me?”

“Captain Ferry, the quartermaster?”

“Yes.”

“I’d rather think not. He’s about occasionally--but his truck with the
sick men is mostly transportation and nourishment----”

“The second time I came to ask him to take me across that
afternoon--the second time,” Morning said slowly, “he told me that if
I appeared on his deck again he’d send me ashore in irons. You see the
_Sickles_ is to beat the _Coptic_ in. I had to come. Why, the
mails couldn’t beat me through from Liaoyang.... I finally got aboard
with some soldiers--but I would have leeched to the anchor.... And,
say, I think I knew you that morning. It seemed as if I could let go
when I felt your hands----”

The two were quiet. The Doctor looked obliquely at an open port with
one eye shut, as if he were not sure of the count....

Accompanying the manuscript was a letter to Noyes, editor of _Western
States_, which chiefly concerned John Morning. Many brave things
were said.... Nevin, deeply stirred with the whole business, saw
the Ploughman coming forth from the millet--saw the Ploughman
going home. That little drama so dear to Fallows’ heart _was_
greater than Liaoyang. Nevin saw that such things are deathless....
Deathless--that’s the word. They look little at the time in the midst
of thunder and carnage; but the thunder dies away and the rains come
and clean the stains--and the spirit of it all lives in one deed or in
one sentence. A woman nurses the sick at Scutari, and the Crimean war
is known for the angel of its battlefield, by the many who do not know
who fought, nor what for.... Nevin felt the big forces throbbing in the
world--the work of the world. It had come to him distantly before. It
had pulled him out of the comfort and ease of his home town to serve
the sick at sea and in the Islands.

The mystery of service. He had never dared tell anyone. His voice broke
so easily. He had covered the weakness in leers and impediments, so the
world would not see. He had talked of his rights and his wages, the
dusty-faced little man. Mystery of Service--and men were ashamed when
it touched them.

But Fallows, laughing and so powerful, this boy’s man-friend, wasn’t
afraid. Was the boy afraid? What had driven him? Did the boy know what
had driven him? What, in God’s name, had driven this human engine that
would not stop--that threw off poisons and readjusted itself against
the individual and collective organizations of death?

Nevin was shaken by the whole story--it girded, girdled him.... Let
Ferry come. Ferry was one of those bleak despoilers of human effort,
whose presence consumed the reality in another. What was Ferry anyway
and Ferry’s sort--a spoiled child or an ancient decadent principle? Was
it merely a child-soul with a universe ahead, or was he very old and
very ill--incorrigible self-love on its road back to nothing?... But
the Ploughman lived, Fallows lived, the boy Morning lived--their work
was marching on.

The Doctor did not speak, because his voice would break. He went about
his work instead--swift magnetic hands.... At least, he could stand
between Morning and the quartermaster--if there were need.

When he came back Morning was at work, a hard bright look of tension
about him, and a line of white under the strange young beard....

“I think I can get it going now. I think it is beginning to come
again,” he said in a hushed tone. The Doctor arranged the pillows
better, sharpened an extra pencil and went out.

“I may have to do those first pages again,” he said an hour later.
“It’s hard to get out of the hospital--you know, what I mean--a man’s
bath is so important to one lying-up that it shuts out a battle-line.
What a fool a sick man is. But I’ll get it----”

He fell asleep in the dusk before the candles came. The Doctor found
him cool, his breathing normal.... The next day Morning worked until
Nevin remonstrated.

“You’ll die, if you go on----”

“I’ll die, if I don’t,” said Morning. The Doctor knew in his heart
that it was true. Still they compromised. That night, as Morning
dropped down into an abyss of exhaustion, he mumbled the whole story of
Eve--the sorrel mare. “She rose to her feet--white death in her eyes,”
he finished....

Nothing attracts the eye on ship-board like a man at work. All idle
ones are caught in the current and come to pay their devoirs to the
man mastered by a strong task.... The Doctor had Morning taken to an
extra berth in his own state-room. The door had a spring lock, for many
medicines and stores were there. Ferry was not likely to happen in
the Doctor’s quarters. The latter even doubted if he would recognize
Morning. He came and went, as the task drove on. Once Morning stopped
to tell him about the deck passage on the _Tungsheng_, and
another time about his brush with the _Hun huises_ in the ravine
across the river from Tawan.... The Doctor saw that Morning had made
a wonderful instrument of himself; he studied how the passion of an
artist works on the body of man. The other found that so long as he ate
regularly and fell asleep without a struggle--he was allowed to go on.

The _Sickles_ was swinging down into the warmth. The sick man had
a bad day, lying in the harbor at Honolulu.

“It isn’t the work, Doctor--it’s the ship’s stopping,” Morning said,
squirming in the berth. “It makes my head hot. I see steamy and all
that. I had it when the _Tungsheng_ lay up for a day in Chifu
on account of the blow.... I had it that day in Nagasski when Ferry
wouldn’t take me on. I’ll be all right to-night.... Give me a little
touch of that gin and lime juice----”

“Just lime juice when heads get hot.... You’re a clever little
drunkard. I’ve been wondering how far you’d go.... Yes, we’ll clear
to-night.... Ferry’s ashore. Come out and see the black boys dive for
pennies.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“There’s something doing with this knife-wound--it doesn’t heal,” the
Doctor said, mid-way between the Islands and the Farallonnes. “The
leg’s all right. Organs and all the little organs seem to thrive on
work. That is, they’re no worse. The leg heals--but this one--you seem
to have established a permanent drain----”

“Fifty pages yesterday--two hundred words a page,” Morning muttered.

“Yes--and the day before--and to-morrow--and the night we left
Honolulu.... If a man worked that way for money, he’d be as dead as
Ferry inside of a month.... Have you read your friend Fallows’ story
yet?”

“No, I don’t dare--a sick man isn’t all himself. And _this_ story
is me. It’s got to be me. It’s better in places than the other, the
one I lost.... I haven’t read Duke’s letter to me yet. He’s strong
medicine. He keeps coming back to me, as it is. I want to get off alone
when the work is done and think. You can’t see him all, when he’s in a
room with you.... He was like you, in being a friend to me.... Yet, I
seem to know you better. You’ve helped me so. I’m pretty happy the way
the story is coming----”

“See how long you can go without a drink to-day.”

“It starts me off, you see. It doesn’t seem to touch me--just steams
right off with the work----”

“That’s rotten sophistry. I’m watching you----”

Nevin had never seen a body so driven by will. Morning appeared no
worse; certainly he was no better; his brain was in absolute abeyance;
his will crashed through clouds of enervation and irresolution. There
were times when Nevin believed Morning would collapse, when he was
finished with Liaoyang, but he was not so sure now. He was sure,
however, that he must not interfere except in extremity.... This was
part of the big work. Somehow he trusted in Duke Fallows--who had
allowed the boy to write the detailed battle-end, and gone back to
Europe to feed the babes of the Ploughman. That last made him want to
doctor the whole world....

Morning had done the story and re-written the lead. The _Sickles_
would enter the Gate at daylight.

“There’s seventy-five or eighty thousand words of it. It’s good--unless
I’m crazy. It’s good, unless this is all a dream. God, I’m thirsty.”

With the work done for the day, however, he asked for lime juice and
water. His temperature was less than two points above normal; nothing
had broken; yet the voyage had not replenished Morning’s body. He could
hardly stand.

“To-night I’ll read the Fallows’ stuff--and the letters.... Doctor, can
you get me ashore early?”

“Think a minute--you don’t know what you ask----”

“Quarantine----”

Nevin nodded. “There’s extra attention to a ship like this--they’ll
have to see that running wound of yours for instance----”

“Not if you don’t report it----”

The Doctor’s lower jaw reached down, and to the right, finding the
walnut. “You wouldn’t even read Duke Fallows’ story before you wrote
yours. A man can’t lie in his own work----”

“You’ve been so good,” Morning said huskily. “I begin to expect
miracles----”

“You can get messages--telegrams, letters--ashore.... And then it may
only take a couple of hours. There isn’t any contagion here that I know
of.”

Morning first read Fallows’ letter to Noyes, editor _Western
States_. It told of the story accompanying--but more of the bearer.
Laughing, loving-hearted, eloquent--Fallows was all through it, and
fine gifts of the man’s thinking. There was suggestion to Noyes to use
Morning’s story and get it across simultaneously in New York. “The boy
has never yet, so far as I can see, found time to arrange a decent
payment for his work. Please observe that unless some one, equally as
capable, gets into Port Arthur, Morning’s story will be the biggest
feature of the war in a newspaper way. I’m going on to Europe on the
Ploughman story. Let Morning do the big battle--I’ll begin to crackle
later.”

And then Morning read the story.... His voice trailed up finally from
the shadows of lower berth. “It’s good,” he said to the Doctor after
midnight.

“It’s dam’ good. It’s better than mine.... He was alive with it--I
mean with the _Ploughman_. It’s the way he did it. He tried to
get it across before we separated. He told me from every angle--told
Lowenkampf--told them all at the station at Yentai. None of us could
see.... He was crazed about it--that we couldn’t see. We were all
choked with blood and death that night. He said Kuropatkin and the
others would see that the Ploughman was right--if they had a sense
of humor. Such density to humor, he called the sin against the Holy
Ghost----”

After they had talked many minutes, Morning broke the seal to his own
letter and learned why he had been barred from the earlier Japanese
armies.


                                  19

THE fineness of Fallows, of Nevin, of Endicott, the station-agent
at Tongu, the risen humanity of the Ploughman--Morning’s soul to
sense these men was empty within him. All that he knew was
blood and blow and force and mass and hate. He lay panting and
possessed. As he had plotted in delirium how to kill Ferry, dwelling
upon the process and the death; so Reever Kennard came in now for a
hatred as perfect and destructive. The letter had called up something
of the same force which had driven John Morning from Liaoyang, over or
through every barrier to the present hour in which the _Sickles_
lay off the entrance of the Golden Gate waiting for dawn, thirty-six
hours ahead of the _Coptic_.

His work was diminished in his own mind; the value of his story was
lost, the zest to market it, the sense of the world’s waiting. He was
a thief in the eyes of men. A man cannot steal. They believed him a
thief.... He thought of moving about the halls of the _Imperial_
that day--of his thoughts as he had watched from the window in the
billiard-room while the picture was taken. He had been tranced in
terror.... Had he but known, he would have made a hell in that house.
He saw Reever Kennard again on the deck of the _Sickles_--his
turning to Kennard for help--unparalleled shame.... The thing he
desired with such terrible zeal now was enacted in his brain. That
hour on the deck of the _Sickles_ was repeated, but this time he
knew what Kennard had done. He called him to the lie in imagination.
The jowl was heavy with scorn and the small slow eyes were bright with
fear--yet they took nothing back and Morning moved closer and closer
demanding, until the devil broke from him, and his knotted hand sank
into the soft center of the man. He watched the writhing of that clean
flanneled liar, watched him arise. The hand sank once more ... the
vile play romping through his mind again and again--hideous fighting
of a man brought up among stable and race-track and freight-route
ruffians--the fighting that feels no pain and only a knockout can
stop....

“Wow--it’s hot as hell in here,” came from Nevin in the upper bunk.

A little before dawn, utterly ravaged by the poison of his thinking,
Morning was struck by the big idea. He turned on the light, steadied
himself to paper and pencil and wrote to Noyes of the _Western
States_:

  Inclosed find (I) Duke Fallows’ first story of Liaoyang; (II)
  his letter to you, containing among other things information
  concerning the bearer; (III) the first ten thousand words of my
  eighty-thousand-word story of the battle fought a month ago to an
  hour--including sketches of Kuropatkin, and others, covering exactly
  terrain, the entire position, strategy, and finally the cause of
  the Russian disaster, with word-picture of the retreat, done on
  the day when it was at its height. The writer left the field and
  made the journey to Koupangtse alone, nearly one hundred miles to
  the railroad. This is the only American eye-witness story besides
  Fallows’. The mails of the second-hand reports will not reach here
  before the arrival of the _Coptic_.... I will sell this story
  to the _Western States_ on condition that it appear in the
  _World-News_, New York, simultaneously--the story to be run in
  not less than seven installments, beginning by telegraph to-morrow. I
  insist on the _World-News_, but have no objection to the general
  syndicating of the story by the _Western States_, my price for
  the American newspaper rights being $1,800 and transportation to New
  York.

“In God’s name, are you doing another book?” Nevin demanded, letting
himself down from the berth. “What’s the matter--you’re on fire?”

Morning was counting off the large first installment of his manuscript.
He placed it upon the table, with the Fallows’ story and the two
letters to Noyes.... Then he put an empty water-pitcher on it,
restoring the balance of his story to its place under his pillow.

“Listen” he said, clutching Nevin’s arm, “here’s the whole thing--if
I’m sick to-morrow. Give it to the reporter from the _Western
States_--make him see it is life-blood. Make him rush with it to
Noyes. It’s the whole business.... He’ll get it--before the quarantine
is lifted, if you--oh, if you can! It’s all there.... You do this for
me?”

“And where will you be all this time----”

“Oh, Nevin--Nevin--for God’s sake put me to sleep! I’m full of burning
and devils! Fill up that needle business and put me to sleep!... I
can’t wait to get across in the New York _World-News_. That’s
Reever Kennard’s own paper.”


                                  20

THE voices sounded far and muted--voices one might hear when
swimming under water. It was easier for him to stay down than rise and
answer. He seemed carried in the strong flow of a river, and preserved
a consciousness, very vague, that it meant death to go down with the
stream. At last, opening his eyes, he saw the city over the pier-sheds.

The rest of the manuscript was still under the pillow, but the
water-pitcher rested upon the bare wood of the table. It was after
twelve. His deadly fury had burned itself out. The thought of the
_World-News_ taking the story, steadied his weakness. It was much
harder to dress than usual, however. He had no shore clothes, but Nevin
would see to that for him. With a glad thrill, he realized that the
_Sickles_ had passed the quarantine, or she wouldn’t be in the
slip. His mind turned to Nevin again, and when he was thinking about
this deep-rooted habit the voyage had inculcated, the Doctor himself
entered.

“Well, you gave me a night.”

“You’ll have some rest now.”

“I’ve brought some clothes for you to go ashore with.... The _Western
States_ got your story two hours ago. Ferry has gone ashore.”

“Did the reporter take it here--or from across the harbor in
quarantine?”

“He was waiting with others--for us to be turned loose. I gave him the
stuff as we were putting about. He didn’t come aboard, I saw his launch
reach landing. I told him to put the stuff into the hands of Noyes and
to hurry back. All of which he did----”

“Why to hurry back?”

The little man’s mouth gave way to strange twistings, and he answered
grudgingly, “Well, I had a story to give him.”

Morning took a room at the Armory, refusing a loan from the Doctor.
“I’ll have it shortly--plenty, I think. I’ll lie up there until I hear
from Noyes. I may hurry East----”

The process was not clear exactly, but the old story of _Mio
Amigo_ had given him a terror of borrowing. The Armory was nearby.
It was clean and cheap. This little decision of choosing the Armory, a
result of _Mio Amigo_, too, is the most important so far.... The
Doctor went with him. The two were hushed and sick with things to say.
Nevin felt he was losing the throb of great service; that he could not
hold it all after this power-house of a man went his way. It was not
only Morning, but Morning was attached to the large, quiet doings and
seeings of the stranger named Duke Fallows.

Morning loved the Doctor. Nevin did not tower; Nevin was instantly in
his comprehension. Their throats tightened.... Nevin saw him to the
light little room, and said as he was leaving:

“I’ve been all over Chinatown, looking up a formula for that wound that
won’t heal. It’s this--full directions inclosed. You’ll have to get
settled before you try it out.”

He disappeared saying he would be back. Morning put the envelope in
a wallet, which he had carried afield.... It was not yet two in the
afternoon. There was a timorous rap at the door. Morning’s head dropped
over drowsily. The door opened just a little and a voice said:

“Is there a sick American soldier in here?”

It was low and timorous like the tapping, but there was a laugh in it,
and something that drove the wildness out of his heart.

“Yes,” he said.

“And may I come in?”

“Yes.”

She was slight and young and pale. She passed between the window and
his eyes. Her brown hair seemed half-transparent. The day was bright,
but not yellow; its soft gray luster was exactly the woman’s tone.
There was a curious unreality about the whole figure. The light in
her eyes was like the light in the window; gray eyes and very deep.
So quietly, she came, and the day was quiet, the house--a queer hush
everywhere.

“There are a few of us who meet the transports--and call on the sick
soldiers. We talk to them--write letters or telegrams. Sometimes they
are very glad. All we want is to help. I haven’t tried many times
before----”

Someone had told him once of a woman in London, who met the human
drift in from the far tides of chance--and made their passing or their
healing dear as heaven. He had always kept the picture. He scarcely
heard all that this young woman was saying.

She was not beautiful, not even pretty. You would see her last in a
room full of women. Under her eyes--he could not tell just where--there
was a line or shadow of strange charm; and where the corner of her
eye-lids folded into the temple a delicate perfection lived; her frail
back had a line of beauty--again, he could not describe this. The
straightness of the figure was that of lightness, of aspiration....
Sometimes she seemed just a girl. Her underlip pursed a little; it was
not red.... She seemed waiting with the lightness of a thistle--waiting
and listening in the lull before a wind.

“My name is Betty Berry.”

“Mine is John Morning.”

She told him that she was a musician, and that San Francisco was her
home, although she was much away. He saw her with something that Duke
Fallows had given him. The hush deepened with the thought. Had he taken
from that tired breast a certain age and clear-eyedness and judgment
of the ways of love-women? There might have been reality in this;
certainly there was reality in his not having seen a white girl in many
months. He was changed; his work done for the moment; he was very tired
and hungry for something she brought.... “Betty Berry.”

He _was_ changed. This Western world was new to him. He seemed
old to the East--old, much-traveled, and very weary; here was faith
and tenderness and reality. Duke Fallows’ city--Duke had strangely
intrenched himself here; and this wraith of an angel who came to him
ministering!... Malice and ambition--reprisal and murder were gone.
What a dirty little man he had been--how rotten with self, how furious
and unspeakable. Why had he not seen it? Why had he rejected Duke
Fallows with his brain and accepted him with his soul? The soul--what
queer place in a man is this? Duke Fallows, Lowenkampf--were in and
out, and Nevin, even the Ploughman now; and this little gray hushed
spirit of a girl had come straight to his soul. Why could one not
always feel these Presences? Would such destroying and malignant hatred
return as that for Reever Kennard last night? Was it because he had
been so passionate for self--that until now, (when he was resting and
she came), decency, delight, nor vision had been able to break through
the deadly self-turned currents?... This was like his finer self coming
into the room.

“How did you know that boys coming home--need to see you?” he asked.
He had to be very careful and arrange what he meant to say briskly and
short. Most of his thoughts would not do at all to speak.

“Women know. So many boys come home--like those on the _Sickles_
whom one is not allowed to see. I have watched them going out, too.
They don’t know why they go. They don’t expect to find a new country,
and yet it seems as if they must go and look. And many come home so
numbed with loneliness that they have forgotten what they need.”

“Then women know what boys--men are?”

She smiled, and seemed listening--her lips pursed, her eyes like a
cloudy dawn, turned from him slightly. What did she hear continually
that did not come to him?

“I mean the men,” he added, “whom the world calls its bravest--the
gaunt explorers and fighters--do women know what boys they are?”

“I don’t know those whom the world calls its bravest.”

“I think I needed to have you come,” he said, “but I didn’t know it.”

The hush was in the room again. Morning felt like a little boy--and as
if she were a child with braids behind. They felt wonderful things, but
could only talk sillinesses.... There was something different about her
every time he looked. It seemed if she were gone; he could not summon
her face to mind. He did not understand it then.

It had grown quite a little darker before they noticed. The far rumble
of thunder finally made them see a storm gathering.

“You won’t go until it’s over?”

“It might be better for me to go now--before it begins.”

“Do you live far?”

“Yes.”

“Then stay--please.”

She drew her chair closer. They tried to tell each other of what they
had been, but this didn’t prosper. The peculiar thing was that their
history seemed to begin from now--all was far and unimportant but
this. Morning, moreover, did not mean to spoil the primary idea in her
mind of his being an American soldier; though all his recent history
impinged upon the one fact that he wasn’t.... He tried to hold her face
in his mind with shut eyes, but it was a forced and unfair picture when
mentally dragged there.... The thunder increased and the rain.

“Once when I was little,” she said, “I was alone in the house when a
storm came, and I was so frightened that day--that I never could be
since, in just the same way.”

Perfect revelation. Something in him wished she were pretty. She was
such a shy and shadowy creature. He called to mind the girls he had
known--coarse and tawdry lot, poor things. Betty Berry was all that
they were not; yet some of them were prettier. He could see their faces
quite distinctly, and this startled him, because shutting his eyes from
full gaze at this girl, he could not see her twice the same.... The
weather cleared. They were together in silence for moments at a time.
She became more and more like a wraith when the natural dusk thickened.

“Was it hard for you to knock and speak--that first moment?”

“Yes.”

“Do--do any of the soldiers ever misunderstand?”

“No----”

“That’s fine of them,” he granted.

“They couldn’t when one has no thought, only to be kind to them----”

“You think they see that at once?”

“They must.”

“A man doesn’t know all about soldiers simply because he ‘soldiers’
with them,” Morning said.

“And then----”

“Yes----”

“They look at me and it’s very plain that I come just to be good to
them.... They think of me in the same way as a Salvation Army lassie or
a missionary----”

“Now, that’s queer,” said he. “It didn’t occur to me at all. It would
never come to me to ask you to leave a tract.”

“And I didn’t feel like a missionary, either.... Now it’s all cleared
again. I must go.”

There was a pang.... Where was Nevin? Why had Noyes or someone from
the _Western States_ not come to him? Coming back to these things
pained.... A boy in the halls called the afternoon papers in a modified
voice.

“Will you get me the papers--especially the _Western States_?”

She hurried to call the boy. He saw the huge picture of Duke Fallows on
the sheet toward him, as she re-entered.

“This is what I want,” he said hoarsely, taking the _Western
States_....

“John Morning,” she whispered.

In inch letters across the top--there it was:

            JOHN MORNING BRINGS IN THE FIRST FALLOWS STORY.

  Full Day Ahead of _Coptic_ Mails.... Morning Leaves Fallows on
  the Field Beyond Liaoyang, Night of September 3rd.... Two Americans
  Alone See Great Battle.... The Incomparable Fallows’ Story Printed in
  Full in the _Western States_ To-day.... John Morning’s Detail
  Picture--a Book in Itself--Begins in the _Western States_
  To-morrow--Biggest Newspaper Feature of the Year’s Campaign.... Read
  To-day How John Morning Brought in the News--a Story of Unparalleled
  Daring and Superhuman Endurance....

Such was the head and the big-print captions. Morning’s riding forth
from Liaoyang on the night of the third--the sorrel mare--the Hun
Crossing--the Liao Crossing and the fight with the river-bandits--the
runaway of the sorrel and her broken heart--his journey dazed and
delirious, covered with wounds, thirty miles to Koupangtse--Tongu--the
battle to get aboard the _Sickles_, first, second, and third
attempts--redoing the great story on shipboard--all this in form of an
interview and printed as a local story, ran ahead of the Duke Fallows
article.

A great moment, and John Morning, forgetting all else, even forgetting
the girl who glanced at him with awed and troubled eyes, held hard for
a moment to the one realization: Noyes would not have printed, “Begins
in the _Western States_ to-morrow,” had he not arranged for
publication in Reever Kennard’s _World-News_....

Her chair was farther away. She waited for him--as one expecting to be
called. He turned; their eyes met full.

“You are not an American soldier----”

“I am an American. I have had a hard time, almost as hard as any
soldier could----”

“I wouldn’t have come--the whole city will serve you----”

“That’s why I didn’t speak. No soldier could have gotten more good.”

Her eyes turned downward. The room was almost dark. A knock at the door.

“I must go----”

He held out his hand. “Won’t you come again?”

“It doesn’t seem----”

He would not let her hand go. “Oh, won’t you come again?”

“Yes.”

“Thank you.”

Betty Berry opened the door for Noyes and another, and she passed out.


                                  21

NOYES said lightly:

“The young lady doesn’t need to go on our account----”

“But she’s gone,” Morning muttered. The walls gave him back the words.

“If it’s any interest to you, Morning, I’ve followed directions in your
letter,” the editor said presently.

“The _World-News_----”

“That’s what I waited for--before coming here. They’re using Field’s
local story to-morrow morning. It’s on the wire to them now. This is
Field.”

“I had the pleasure of bringing in your manuscript from the
_Sickles_ rather early this morning,” said the latter. “Also I did
the story that Doctor Nevin told me.”

“I wish he would come,” said Morning.

“Nevin?”

“Yes.”

“He’s on his toes where you are concerned,” said Field.

“He has done much for me----”

“Friend Fallows is rather strong for you, too, I should say,” Noyes
offered.

He was a pale, soft, middle-aged man who gave the impression of being
more forceful than he looked.

“I owe everything to him,” said Morning.

“By the way, Morning, what were you mad at, when you wrote that
letter of directions to me? I followed it carefully as you
said--price--_World-News_--everything. We’ll have a lot of other
papers beside the _World-News_--but that letter made me hot under
the collar every time I glanced at it----”

“I was just about to break. I was very sick of words. Every sentence
was like drawing a rusty chain in one ear and out the other.”

“Of course you know you’ve got the world by the tail on this Russian
end--this Liaoyang story,” Noyes observed.

“I’ve written the story. The big part of the copy is here for you.”

“You’re not going to quit now. Are you down and out physically?”

“No.”

“Why, Morning,” Field broke in, “you ought to make ten thousand dollars
in the next thirty days. You’ve got a big feature for every magazine in
America--and then the book.”

“The chance doesn’t come but once in a life time--and then only to
God’s chosen few, who work like hell,” said Noyes, and he sat back to
review this particularly finished remark.

“What would you do?” Morning asked.

“I’d start for New York to-night. Field’s story about you--the one
we run to-night at the head of Fallows’ story--will start the game.
A couple of installments of your big yarn will have appeared in the
_World-News_ when you reach New York. If it ends as good as it
begins, you’ll have the big town groggy within a week. You’ll receive
the magazine editors in your hotel, contract to furnish so much--and
talk off same to expert typists. That’s the way things are done. You’ve
got the goods. New York serves a man like that. It’s nothing to me, but
I know the game--even if I never cornered a Liaoyang story. Fallows
said you have done more work for less money than any man in America.
He’s one of our owners----”

So Noyes rambled on; Field breaking in with fresh and timely zest.
Morning had not looked beyond the main story. He saw separate articles
now in every phase. It would work out.... Four days of rest--looking
out of the car-window. He would land in New York once and for all--land
hard--do it all at once. Then he would rest.... He was seething
again.... With this advantage he could break into the markets that
would stand aloof from his ordinary product for years. All day his
devil had slept, and now was awake for rough play in the dusk. His
dreams organized--the big markets--breaking out of the newspapers into
the famous publications! He had the stuff. It would be as Noyes said.
He would have thought of it for another man.

“How soon can I start?” he said.

“Four or five hours.”

“I’m obliged to you.... Fallows seems still with me,” he said
strangely.... “I must see Nevin----”

There was a ringing in his brain at some unused door, but he did not
answer. He was driven again. Harrowing the idea of waiting a single day
... in these modern hours when world-events are so swiftly forgotten.

Everything was settled. Morning was taken from place to place in a
cab. Noyes not only was conscientious about seeing to every detail for
Friend Fallows--but he made it very clear that he was not accustomed to
spend his evenings down-town. From time to time, he dropped hints of
what he would be doing at home at this hour. Down-town nights were all
put away for him, he declared.

The balance of the manuscript was locked in the safe at the _Western
States_ to be set up to-morrow, and proofs sent out. The second
and possibly third installments of the story would go to the
_World-News_ by telegraph, the rest follow by mail.

“To-morrow morning, out in the mountains, you’ll have the satisfaction
of knowing that New York is reading Field’s story which we ran to-day.
Is that stuff the Doctor gave us, right, Morning?”

“Huh?”

“Did you dream about that sorrel mare--entrails out--walking like a
man--white death in her eyes?” Noyes pursued.

“God, I wonder if I did? Did I dream that I did the big story
twice?----”

He was in pain; there was lameness in his mind at being driven again.
He wished Noyes would go home.... Messengers were back and forth to the
_Sickles_ trying to get Nevin. Transportation to New York was the
newspaper’s affair; when it was handed him, something went from Morning
that he could not get again. There was much to drink. Noyes had put all
this from him so long that he found the novelty humorous--and yet, what
a bore it was after all! Field was a steaming geyser of enthusiasms.
Both talked. Others talked. Morning was sick with words. He had not
had words drummed into his brain in so long. He half-realized that his
impatience for all these things was disgust at himself, but all his
past years, and their one-pointed aim held him now. This was his great
chance.... He wanted Nevin.

These city men gave him everything, and disappointed him. Had he
been forced to battle with them for markets; had he been forced to
accept the simple column rate, he could not have seen them as now.
Because they had become his servants, he touched their weakness. And
what giants he had known--Fallows and Nevin--and Endicott, the little
Englishman at Tongu.... You must answer a man’s need when that need is
desperate--to make a heart-hold. A man makes his friends before his
world capitulates.

He was waiting in the bar of the _Polander_.... Nevin had not
been found. Morning was clothed, expensed; his order upon New York for
the price of the story would not be touched until he reached there. He
had won already; he had the world by the tail.... Nevin did not come.
There was no bite in the drink for Morning. He was in pain; others
made a night of it. He struggled in the pits of self, that sleepless,
never-forgetting self. There was a calling, a calling deep within, but
the outer noise spoiled the meaning. Men drank with single aim; they
drank like Russian officers--to get drunk. They were drunk; all was
rich and free. Noyes knew many whom he saw every day, and many whom
he had seen long ago. He called them forward to meet Morning, who had
brought in the story.... Morning who knew Duke Fallows--Morning who had
the big story of the year, beginning to-morrow.... And always when they
passed, Noyes remarked that the down-town stuff was silly as the devil.
White and clerical, his oaths were effective. He drank hard and well
as men go. Field drank well--his impulses becoming more gusty, but not
evil.... Once Morning would have called this a night of triumph. Every
one looked at him--talked respectfully--whispered, pointed.... Twenty
minutes left--the crowd grew denser in the _Polander_ bar. There
was a voice in the arch to the hotel. Ferry entered in the midst of
men. He was talking high, his eyes dancing madly.

“Why, the son of ... threw me--that’s all. He’s done with the
_Sickles_.... Who? Why, Nevin, the squint-eyed son of a.... He
threw me.... I thought this Morning was some drunken remittance man
wanting passage. Reever Kennard said he was a thief.... Nevin might
have come to me.... Why, Morning didn’t even pay his commutation for
rations----”

“I would have mailed it to you, Ferry--except for this meeting,” said
Morning, his voice raised a little to carry.

An important moment to him, and one of the strangest of his life. This
was the man whom he had dreamed of murdering, the man who had made
him suffer as only the gods should make men suffer. And yet Ferry was
like an unpleasant child; and Morning, troubled by greater things,
had no hate now, no time nor inclination to hate. The face that had
seemed dark and pitiless on the deck in Nagasaki harbor--was only weak
and undone--an unpleasant child crying, refusing to be quieted--an
annoyance to the house. Such was the devil of the _Sickles_,
the man who had stood between him and America, the man who had tried
to make him miss beating the _Coptic_ mails.... They faced each
other, the quartermaster, wincing and shrunken.

“I had to get across, Ferry. I was too sick to make you see. Kennard
always says that. He seems to know that best--but it isn’t true.... I
was bad to look at. You see, I had come a long way. I was off my head
and eyes----”

“I didn’t know,” Ferry blurted, “and now Nevin has thrown me. I wasn’t
supposed to take civilians----”

“I know it--only I had to get across.... I don’t know what I’d have
done but for Nevin. He was mother and father on the voyage. I can give
you the commutation now----”

“You were a stowaway----”

“That’s what made it delicate to pay for the passage----”

Ferry was broken-nerved. He suggested buying a drink, as a child who
has learned a fancied trick of men.

And Morning drank. Noyes glanced at Field, who had suddenly become pale
and anxious with a story-idea. He was at work--drink-clouds shoved
back and all the exterior enthusiasm--fresh as after a night’s rest. He
was on a new story.

Ferry went away and Morning looked at the clock. Only five minutes
of his life had been used in this important transaction. Nevin had
not come--Nevin who had lost his berth, thrown over his own work for
him.... There would be no more _Nevin_ on the _Sickles_.
Would he come East?

“Oh, I say, Field--drop the Ferry end of the story,” Morning said.

“Sure,” said Field glibly.

“Nothing to it,” said Noyes.

Morning was too tired to go further, though he felt their lie.

“But, Nevin,” he said to Noyes.

“I’ll have him found to-morrow. That’s the big local thing to-morrow.”

“Tell him----”

When Morning stopped telling Noyes and Field what to tell Nevin for
him, it was time to go for the ferry. The _Polander_ slipped
out of Morning’s mind like a dream--smoke, voices, glasses, indecent
praise. Noyes reached across the bar for a package. That last seemed
quite as important as anything.

They left him at the ferry--these men of the _Western States_--servants
 of his action and his friends.... And somewhere in the city was little
Nevin, who had done his work and who had not come for his pay; somewhere
in the city, but apart from voices and adulation--the man who had
forgotten himself in telling the story of how the news was brought
in.... It was all desperately unfinished. It hurt him every moment.

In the Pullman berth he opened the package Noyes had given him; the
porter brought a glass. Afterward, he lay in the darkness. It was very
still when he had become accustomed to the wheels. The going always had
soothed him. In the still train and the peace of the road, he heard
at last that ringing again at the new door of his life, and opened to
Betty Berry, who had promised to come.




BOOK II.

THE HILL-CABIN


                                   1

MORNING sat in the yielding leather of the _Boabdil_ library,
quite as if he had passed his youth in the midst of people who
talk of doing things. Liaoyang had been written, even the abandoned
impediments of retreat covered. It had all come to pass quite
according to the early ideas of Noyes and Field. John Morning was
Liaoyang in America. His book _Liaoyang_, magazine and newspaper
articles gathered together, was established as important authority in
encyclopædic and other reference books. The most captious must grant
that living man can do no more than this.

Morning had dined with the president. One after another he had made
every magazine of note, and much money. He had done his own story of
the journey, which proved more of a comment maker than the battle
description; and his article on the deck passages of the Chinese
coolies will always be an incentive to foreign missions. New York had
waited upon him, had exploited him, given him bewildering payments, and
called him everything, even Hugoesque and Tolstoianic. It was very hard
for Morning to retain the conviction that there wasn’t ten pages of all
this copy that ranked in sheer value with the ten pages of Fallows’
_Ploughman_. He didn’t for awhile.

Liaoyang was on in full magazine blast in America, while Mukden and
Sha River were being fought across the world. At this time Morning
spent an hour a day, as war-expert for a particularly incessant daily
newspaper of New York. So all people knew what the campaign was about,
and what certain generals might do, from past grooves of their wearing
in history. Also German gentlemen of military pasts wrote letters
disputing the prophecies. Morning had certainly arrived.

The condition or place of arrival was slippery. The peace of Portsmouth
had been protocoled.... Liaoyang, deep in the valley of desuetude, was
without even the interest of perspective. The name, Liaoyang, made the
mind of the world lame.... Even in the heat of arrival, the thing had
puzzled him. Money ceased to gladden him after a few mails; did not
spare him from the nearest irritation. Plainly he was quite the same
John Morning after appearing in the great magazines as before; and the
people whom he had interested were mainly of the same sort that had
come forward in the _Polander_ bar.

He had been a sick man since the Hun Crossing. When the big New York
task was finished, and it was done with something of the same drive
of will that characterized the second writing of the main story on
board the _Sickles_, he was again ready to break, body and
brain. Running down entirely, he had reached that condition which has
an aversion to any task. His productive motors had long lain in the
dark, covered from the dust. This was the time he clubbed about. The
_Boabdil_ was a favorite, but even here, men drew up their chairs
from time to time, day and night, dispatching the waiter for drink and
saying:

“Those Japs are pretty good fighters, aren’t they?” or, “What do you
consider will become of China in the event of----” or, very cheerily,
“Well, Mr. Morning, are you waiting for another war?”

He slept ill; drank a very great deal; the wound in his side had not
healed and he had made no great friends. He thought of these four
things on this particular mid-day in the _Boabdil_ library....
Nearby was old Conrad with the morning papers, summoning the strength
to dine. It was usually late in the afternoon, before he arose to
the occasion, but with each stimulant, he informed the nearest
fellow-member that he was going to eat something presently. The old
man stopped reading to think about it. After much conning, he decided
that he had better have just one more touch of this with a dash of
that--which he took slowly, listening for comment from within....
After dinner he would smoke himself to sleep and begin preparing for
the following morning’s chops. “Eat twice a day, sir--no more--not for
years.”

Conrad in his life had done one great thing. In war-time, before the
high duty was put on, he had accumulated a vast cellar full of whiskey.
That had meant his hour. Riches, a half century of rich dinners,
clean collars and deep leather chairs--all from that whiskey sale....
“Picturesque,” they said of Conrad at the _Boabdil_. “What would
the club do without him?”...

Morning watching him now, remembered an old man who used to sit at a
certain table in a Sixth avenue bar. The high price of whiskey had
reversed conditions in this case, and a changed collar meant funeral or
festivity. Forty years ago this old man had bred a colt that became a
champion. That was his hour, his answer for living. After all, Morning
concluded, having seen Conrad fall asleep one night, the old horseman
was less indecent.

Finally Morning thought of the little Englishman at Tongu and the
blanket; then of Fallows and Nevin--Fallows saying, “Come on upstairs,”
that day of their first meeting at the _Imperial_, and Nevin
saying, “Well, you gave me a night----” .... Morning began to laugh.
“Picturesque, what-would-we-do-without Conrad”--sitting five days and
nights on the deck passage from the mouth of the Pei-ho to the lowest
port of Japan....

He hadn’t thought much of Nevin and Fallows and the Tongu Endicott in
the months that followed his arrival from San Francisco, when the work
went with a rush. And Betty Berry--there were times when he was half
sure she--name, Armory and all--formed but an added dream that Nevin
had injected hypodermically the night before.

Morning could think about all these now. The editors had begun to tell
what _they_ wanted. He had sent in stuff which did not meet their
needs. He was linked to war in their minds. Moreover, plentiful money
had brought to the surface again his unfinished passion to gamble,
as his present distaste for work had increased the consumption of
alcohol.... It was _Reverses_ that reminded him of Fallows and
Nevin and the Tongu blanket and the angel he had entertained in the
Armory room.

Editors didn’t care for his fiction. “A good war story is all right
any time,” they said, but apparently his were not, for five or six
trials didn’t take. He had a tendency to remember Fallows when he
wrote fiction. The story of the Ploughman came curiously back to mind,
when he was turned loose from straight narrative, and he was “balled”
between planes.... He thought of a play....

Varce now came into the library and drew up a chair. Varce had
one of his stories; Varce edited a magazine that sold several
million every two weeks. Long ago, with great effort, and by paying
prodigiously, Varce had secured from Morning one of the final tiles
of the great Liaoyang mosaic.... Varce was tall, a girl’s dream of
poet-knight--black, wavy hair, straight excellent features, a figure
lean enough for modern clothes.

“Morning,” he said, “do you know the fighting game?”

“You mean pugilistically?”

“Yes.”

“I used to do fights.”

Varce went on presently:

“A great series of articles is to be written on the boyhood and general
atmosphere of the men who have made great ring history--big stuff, you
know--well written--from a man who can see the natural phenomena of
these bruisers--how they are bred and all that. Now three things go
into the fighter--punch, endurance, but, most of all, instinct--the
stuff that doesn’t let him ‘lay down’ when the going is rough, and
doesn’t keep him from putting the wallop on a groggy opponent. Many a
good fighter has missed championship because he was too tender-hearted
to knock-out a helpless----”

“Do you like that story of mine you have, Varce?” Morning asked yawning.

“Oh, it’s a good enough story--a bit socialistic--what are you trying
to get at?”

“No need of me furnishing diagrams, if the manuscript leaves you that
way,” Morning said. “You were just saying about the last touch to a
beating--yes, I’ve heard about those three things----”

“Do you want the series?”

“No, I’m doing a play.”

... After Varce had gone, Morning thought it all out again. Varce was
living a particularly unmitigated lie. Five years ago he had done
some decent verse. He had a touch of the real poetic vision, and he
had turned it to trade. He was using it now to catch the crowd. An
especially sensational prostitution, this--one that would make the
devil scratch his head.... And Varce could do without him. Liaoyang had
not made the name of John Morning imperative. Moreover, he himself was
living rotten. He wished he had told Varce what he thought of him and
his multi-millionaire subscription.... He hadn’t; he had merely spoken
of his play. The bridges were not burned behind him. He might be very
glad to do a series of “pug” stories for Varce. There were good stories
in these fighters--but the good stories, as he saw them, were not what
Varce saw in the assignment.

It summed up that he was just beginning over again; that he must beat
the game all over again in a different and larger dimension--or else
quit.... He ordered a drink.... He could always see himself. That was a
Morning faculty, the literary third eye. He saw himself doing a series
of the fighters--saw it even to the red of the magazine covers, and the
stuff of the announcements.... John Morning, the man who did fifty-mile
fronts at Liaoyang, putting all his unparalleled battle color in the
action of a 24-foot ring. Then the challenge to the reader: “Can
you stand a descriptive force of this calibre? If you can, read the
story of the great battle between Ambi Viles and Two-pill Terry in
next issue.”... He would have to tell seriously before the battle
description, however, how Ambi was a perfect gentleman and the sole
support of his mother, an almost human English gentlewoman. It is well
to be orthodox.

Somebody spoke of whiskey in the far end of the library, insisting
on a certain whiskey, and old Conrad cocked up his ears out of a
meaty dream.... Morning closed his eyes. He felt the warmth of a ship
beneath, the drive of the cold rain on deck and the heaving of the
sea. There was something almost sterile-clean about that deck-passage,
compared to this.... Then he remembered again the men he had known,
and the woman who came to the Armory room--and the long breath his
soul took, with her coming.... Finally he saw himself years hence,
as if he had quit the fight now and taken New York and Varce as they
meant to use him.... He was sunk in leather, blown up like an inner
tube and showing red, stalled in some club library, and forcing the
world to remember Liaoyang, bringing down the encyclopædia to show his
name, when extra drunk.... No, he would be hanging precariously to some
porter job on Sixth avenue, trying to make the worn and tattered edges
of his world believe how he had once carried the news from Liaoyang to
Koupangtse....

A saddle-horse racked by on the asphalt, and turned into the park.
Morning arose. There was stabbing and scalding from the unhealed wound
in his side. The pain reminded him of the giants he had once known and
of the woman who came to the Armory room. It had always been so; always
something about him unsound, something that would not heal. He had
accepted eagerly, but ever his giving had been paltry. And he had to
be pulled down, out of the shine of fortune, before he remembered how
great other men had been to him.


                                   2

THAT night he dreamed that he had passed through death.... He was
standing upon a cliff, between the Roaming Country and a valley of
living earth. He did not want the spirit region; in his dream he turned
his back upon it. He did not want the stars. Illusion or not, he wanted
the earth. He looked down upon it through the summer night, down
through the tree-tops into a valley that lay in the soft warm dusk. He
watched with the passion and longing of a newly-dead mother, who hears
her child crying for her, and senses the desolation of her mate....
The breath of earth came up to him through the exhaling leaves--leaves
that whispered in the mist. He could have kissed the soil below for
sheer love of it. He wanted the cool, damp earth in his hands, and the
thick leaf-mould under his feet, and the calm wide listening of the
trees.... Stars were near enough, but earth was not. He wanted to be
down, down in the drip of the night. He would wait in ardor for the
rain of the valley.... Looking down through the tree-tops, he sensed
the earth passion, the lovely sadness of it--and desired it, even if he
must die again.... There was an ache in the desire--like the ache of
thirst that puts all other thoughts away, and turns the dream and the
picture to running water.

He awoke, and went to his window in the dark. He saw New York and
realized that he was dying for the country. His eyes smarted to tears,
when he remembered rides and journeys and walks he had taken over the
earth, so thoughtlessly, without knowing their boon and beauty and
privilege.... While he was standing there, that which he had conceived
as To-morrow, became To-day, and appeared over the rim of the opposite
gorge of apartments. The first light of it sank far down into the tarry
stuffiness of the pavement, but the dew that fell with the dawn-light
was pure as heaven to his nostrils.

That day he crossed the river, and at the end of a car-line beyond
Hackensack, walked for a half-hour. It was thus that Morning found his
hill. Just a lifted corner of a broad meadow, with a mixed company of
fine trees atop. He bought it before dusk. The dairyman’s farmhouse was
a quarter-mile distant; the road, a hundred and fifty yards from the
crest of the hill, with trees thinly intervening. The south was open to
even wider fields; in the far distance to the west across the meadows,
the sky was sharpened by a low ribbon of woods and hill-land. In the
east was the suspended silence of the Hudson.

“I want a pump and a cabin, and possibly a shed for a horse,” he said,
drinking a glass of buttermilk, at the dairyman’s door.

He was directed to Hackensack.

With the falling darkness again upon the hills, he saw that certain
crowded, mid-growth trees were better down. The fine thought of
building his cabin of them occurred. By the time he reached Hackensack,
the house of logs was so dear in thought, that he wanted nothing short
of a cabinet-joiner for such a precious task. That night he met Jake
Robin, who was sick of nailing at houses in rows, a job that had long
since ceased to afford deep breaths to his capacity.

The next day Morning moved to Hackensack, and Jake was at work....
Three thousand he had lost gambling ... he wished he had it now.
Much more had been lost, and not so cleanly, in reaching the final
_Boabdil_ realization, but he had enough. Presently he was helping
Jake, and there was joy in it.

They tapped a spring some thirty feet beneath the humped shoulder of
the hill; built a shed for the horse he had not yet found, and then
fitted the cabin to the fire-place of concrete and valley stone. One
sizeable room it was, that faced the open south from the brow of the
hill.

A fine unfolding--this love of Morning’s for wood itself, and woods.
Over a half-hundred trees were his own--elm, beech, hickory, oak,
ash, and maple--and like a fine clean colony of idealists they stood
meditating.... One never knows the quality of wood until one builds
his own house. Opening the timbers for the big mortices--each was a
fresh and fragrant discovery. Jake and he lingered long, after the
cabin was roofed, over the heavy oak flooring, and the finishing of
windows and doors and frames. They built some furniture together of
hickory, which is a wood a man should handle with reverence, for it is
fine in its way as wheat and grapes and honey and wild olives. Hickory
answers graciously to the work of the hand, and, like a good dog,
flourishes with men.... They built a table and bed-frame and a chest
of drawers; and Morning at last went to Hackensack for pots, kettles,
and tea things. Jake Robin, like one who has built a ship, was loath to
leave without trying the cabin. Morning kept him busy in the clearing,
long after he was in the mood to start work on the play. There was a
platform to build for the pump; also a certain rustic bench. The shed
needed tinkering; an extra cabinet for books was indispensable--and
screens.... No one had ever let Jake play before in his life....
Moreover, he was paid for the extra hour required to walk to and from
town. All Hack heard about it.

“You’ll need a chicken-coop----”

“No,” said Morning. The look on Jake’s face was like old Amoya’s in
Tokyo, when the rickshaw-runner was forbidden to take him to the
Yoshuwara.

“I can fit you up a little ice-box near the spring--so’s you’ll pump it
full of water, and keep your vittles----”

Morning wanted the stillness for the play, but he couldn’t refuse. Two
days more. Then Jake scratched his head.

“You’ll be wantin’ a vine on the cabin,” he ventured. “I know the man
who has the little ivies.”

This was irresistible. “Can you see me owning a vine?” asked Morning.
Yet there was significance in the idea together with the play.

“And I’ll build a bit of a trainer to start it. By the end of
summer----”

“Bring it on, Jake----”

“An’ I’ll fetch a couple of rose vines, and dreen them with broken
crockery from the holler----”

The vine prospered and the play; and the roses began to feel for Jake’s
trellis. The tool-box was still there.

“You’ll be needin’ fire-wood for the winter. To be sure, you can buy
it, but what’s the good, with dead stuff to be knocked down and small
trees to be thinned out, and the shed gapin’ open for the saddle-horse
you’re not sure of findin’? It’s wood you ought to have in there----”

In fact, it was no small task to break Jake of the hill-habit. Morning
grew accustomed to the ax, and the crashing of branches, many of which
would have been sacrificed to the strong winds of the Fall. Meanwhile,
the shed had come into its own, and there were piles of firewood
seasoning in the sun and shade.

He was alone with the nights; sitting there in his doorway when it was
fine, studying the far lights of the city.... City lights meant Varce
and Conrad, not his great friends. Every hour that he looked, he liked
better the wind about the doorway and the open southern fields.

One night he felt his first twinge of sorrow for the big city.
Hatred, it had been before. Other men were tortured as he had been,
but somehow, the way didn’t get into their dreams and drive them
forth, as he had been driven. They were really not to blame for
_Boabdilling_; they sank into the cushions and lost the sense of
reality. And then the thousands in the hall-bedrooms and worse, to whom
_Boabdil_ was heaven’s farthest pavilion! Morning seemed to have
something to say to those thousands, but wasn’t ready yet.

He longed for Fallows, whom he saw more clearly every day--especially
since the _Ploughman_ had crept into the play.... He wanted to
wait upon the big sick man; to have him here, to prepare food for him,
and sit with him in these silences. He wanted Endicott at Tongu, too,
and Nevin--oh, yes, Nevin. It was like a prayer that he sent out some
nights--for the unearthing of these giants from their hiding--so that
he could listen to them, and serve them and make them glad for their
giving to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

A deep summer night. The purple of the north seemed washed and thinned
in ether, (nothing else could bring out the heavenly lustre of it),
and the black, fragile top-foliage of the woods leaned against it,
listening, feminine. Darkness only on the ground; yet he loved it, the
heart of the dusk that throbbed there. He loved the earth and the water
that mingled in the hollows. He breathed with strange delight the air
that brushed the grass and the clover-scent that came to him around the
hill.... And this was the momentary passion--that he was going from all
this. He loved it as one who was passing beyond. It was like the dream
after all. Just as Mother Earth was unfolding, he was called. She was
like a woman long lived-with, but unknown, until the sudden revelation
of parting.... He touched the stones with his hand.

In the hush, waiting for a katydid to answer, that night, Morning fell
asleep.... He had climbed to his cabin, as if it were a room on an
upper floor. Before he opened the door, he knew someone was within.
Before the light, it was clear that someone was curled up asleep on the
foot of his hard bed.... Yes, it was she who had restored his soul,
that day at the Armory--and there she lay sleeping.... He did not call
her, as he had called Moto-san; there was no thought to waken her, for
everything was so pure and lovely about it. He stood there, and watched
her gratefully--it seemed a long time--until the katydid answered.


                                   3

AFTER Markheim had kept the play three months--it was now
November--Morning crossed to the city to force the decision.
The producer was prevailed upon to see him.

“It will be read once more,” said Markheim. “It will go or not. We like
it, but we are afraid of it. To-morrow we will know or not.”

“What are you afraid of?”

“I don’t know. I do not read plays.”

“To-morrow?”

“Yes.”

Markheim bought his opinions, and was attentive to those which cost the
most....

Morning drew a napkin the size of a doll’s handkerchief from a pile. A
plate of eggs and bacon rung, as if hitting a bull’s-eye upon the white
marble before him. He was still wondering what Markheim was afraid of.
He didn’t like the feel of it. The Lowenkampf of Duke Fallows’ had
crept into the play--Lowenkampf, whose heart was pulled across the
world by the mother and child. How they had broken his concentration on
the eve of the great battle.

At the time, he had seen the tragic sentimentalist as one caught in a
master weakness, but all that was gone. Lowenkampf still moved white in
his fancy, while the other generals, even Mergenthaler, had become like
the dim mounds in his little woodland.... And what a dramatic thing, to
have a woman and a child breaking in upon the poised force of a vast
Russian army. It was like Judith going down into the valley-camp of the
Assyrians and smiting the neck of Holofernes with his own fauchion.
Morning’s mind trailed away in the fascination of Fallows, and in the
dimension he had been unable to grasp in those black hours of blood....
So many things were different after this summer alone; yet he had never
seemed quite rested, neither in mind nor body.... He had been all but
unkillable like the sorrel Eve before that journey from Liaoyang to New
York. Now, even after the ease and moral healing of the summer alone,
his wound was unhealed....

The telephone-miss in Markheim’s reception-room was very busy when
he called the next afternoon.... Something about her reminded him
of _Mio Amigo_. She was a good deal sharper. Was it the brass
handle?... To hear her, one would think that she had come in late, and
that New York needed scolding, even spanking, which exigencies of time
and space deferred for the present. Her words were like the ‘spat,
spat, spat,’ of a spanking.... She was like an angry robin, too, at one
end of a worm. She bent and pulled, but the worm had a strangle-hold on
a stone. It gave, but would not break.... Morning saw the manuscript
at this point on her side-table, and the fun of the thing was done....
She looked up, trailed a soft _arpeggio_ on the lower-right of her
board, grasped the manuscript firmly, and shoved it to him.

“Mr. Morning to see Mr. Markheim,” he said.

“Mr. Markheim is----”

But the husky voice of the producer just now reached them from within.

“Busy----” she finished with a cough.... New York was at it again.
_Stuyvesant_ especially had a devil, and _Bryant_ was the
last word.

“... You can’t see Mr. Markheim. This is your message----”

“Oh, it really isn’t. This is just an incident. I hesitate to trouble
you, but I must see Mr. Markheim.”

The play was wrapped in the identical paper in which it had been
brought.

She must have touched something, for a boy came in--a younger brother,
past doubt--but so bewildered, as to have become habitually staring.

“Tell Mr. Markheim, Mr. Morning insists on seeing him.”

The boy seemed on the point of falling to his knees to beg for mercy.
Morning’s personal distemper subsided. Here was a drama, too--the great
American stage.... One word came out to him from Markheim:

“In-zists!”

“How do you do, Mr. Morning--good afternoon.”

Markheim had his hand in a near drawer, and was smiling with something
the same expression that old Conrad used when listening for the dinner
notice.

“You see we do not want it--we are afraid,” he began, and becoming
suddenly hopeful, since Morning drew forth no bomb, he added, “You have
a girl’s idea of war, Mr. Morning--good afternoon.”

He liked his joke on the name. “We were in doubt about the war
part--afraid--and so we consulted an expert--one who was on the spot,”
he said pleasantly.

Morning’s mind was searching New York; his idea was fateful.

“We are not bermidded to divulge who the expert is, but we did not
spare money----”

Morning’s eye was held to the desk over the shoulder of Markheim, to a
large square envelope, eminent in blue, upon the corner of which was
the name “Reever Kennard.”

“I’m sure you did not. He was always a high-priced man,” he said
idly.... And so this was the long-delayed answer to his appearance in
the _World-News_ to the extent of eighty thousand words. He had
heard that Mr. Reever Kennard was back on finance and politics....
Markheim had not followed his mind nor caught the sentence. Morning
passed out through the hush. He paused at the door to give the
office-boy a present--a goodly present to be divided with the sister,
just now occupied with a fresh outbreak of obstreperousness on the part
of _Gramercy_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning had moments of something like the old rage; but the extreme
naturalness of the thing, and its touch of humor, helped him over for
the next hour or so. Apparently, the opportunity had fallen into the
lap of Mr. Reever Kennard; come to him with homing familiarity. The
war-expert had spoken, not as one offering his values gratuitously,
but as one called and richly paid. Morning reflected that the summer
alone on his hill must have subdued him. As a matter of fact, he was
doubtful about the play; not because Markheim was afraid; not by any
means because Mr. Reever Kennard had spoken, but because it had not
come easily, and the three incidents which made the three acts did
not stand up in his mind as the exact trinity for the integration of
results. But one cannot finally judge his own work.

He wandered straight east from that particular theatre of Markheim’s
where the offices were and passed Fourth Avenue. He never went quite
that way again, but remembered that there was an iron picket-fence of
an old residence to lean against; and at the corner of it, nearer town,
the sidewalk sank into a smoky passage where lobsters, chops, and a
fowl or two were tossed together in front. It was all but dark. He was
averse to taking his present mood across the river. It wasn’t fair to
the cabin. _Mio Amigo_ recurred queerly and often to mind....

“Look--there’s Mr. Morning----”

“Sh-sh--oh, Charley--sh-sh!”

Morning was compelled. Could this little shrinking creature, beside
whom the under-sized brother now appeared hulking, be the same who had
bossed Manhattan to a peak in his presence such a little while ago? She
seemed terrified, all pointed for escape, sick from the strain of the
street.

“Why, hello!” Morning said.

She pulled her brother on, saying with furious effort of will, “I’m
sure we’re much obliged for your present----”

“I had forgotten that,” Morning said.

“We’re going to take in the show,” the boy remarked, drawing back. At
large, thus, he was much better to look upon.

“Come on, Charley--we mustn’t detain----”

Morning had an idea, and looked at the sister as he said, “Won’t you
have supper with me somewhere? I have nothing----”

Her face was livid--as if all the fears of a lifetime had culminated
into the dreadful impendings of this moment. She tried to speak....
Then it came to Morning in a belated way that she thought she was
accosted; that she connected his gift with this meeting. He couldn’t
let her go now--and yet, it was hard for him to know what to say.

“I mean we three,” he began hastily. “This play being refused rather
knocked me out, and I didn’t know what to do with the evening. I don’t
live in New York, you know. I thought you and your brother--that we
might have supper together----”

He spoke on desperately, trying to stir to life the little magpie
sharpness again. It was more to her brother she yielded. New York
must have frightened her terribly.... Morning managed to get down to
the pair that night. He was clumsy at it, however, for it was a new
emprise. Mostly John Morning had been wrapped and sealed in his own
ideas. The boy was won with the first tales of war, but the sister
remained apart with her terrors. No one had taught her that kindness
may be a motive in itself.

And now Morning was coping with what seemed a real idea: What was the
quality of the switch-board that harnessed her character? Here she was
wild and disordered--like a creature denied her drug. With that mystic
rumble of angry New York in her ears--the essential buzz of a million
desires passing through her--she was a force, flying and valuable
force. Was she lain open to obsession now because she was removed from
that slavery? Was that maddening vibration the lost key to her poise?

He tried hard, not daring to be attentive in the least. She would have
fled, if he had. He was boyishly kind to her brother. That awed, and
was beginning to hold her.

Morning saw clearly that she stood like a stretched wing between her
brother’s little soul and the world. She could be brave in sheltering
Charley. The boy was really alive. He ate and answered and listened
and lived, the show ahead.... In the midst of it, Morning awoke to the
fact that he was having a good time; and here was the mystery--with
the last two people in New York he would have chosen; a two, his
whole life-business had taught him to employ thoughtlessly, as other
metropolitan adjuncts--pavements, elevators, messengers. Here was life
in all its terror and complication, the same struggles he had known;
yet he had always seen himself as a sort of Titan alone in the great
destroying elements. The joke was on him.

Charley left them for just a moment. The sister said, as if thinking
aloud:

“... And yet, he cries every morning because he has to go to the
office. Oh, he wouldn’t go there without me----”

A world of meaning in that. They were sitting in the dark of the
_Charity Union_ play-house, with Charley between them. The aims
and auspices of the performance were still indefinite to Morning, who
had not ceased to grapple with his joke--the seriousness with which he
had habitually regarded John Morning, his house, his play, his unhealed
wound, his moral debility....

For fifteen minutes a giant had marvelously manhandled his companion.
The curtain dropped an instant, and in the place where the giant had
performed now stood a ’cello and a chair.... She came on like the
wraith of an angel--and sat down and played.... How long she played
Morning never knew, but somewhere in it he caught his breath as one
who had come back to life.... And then she was gone. The audience was
mildly applauding. He turned to the sister leaning on the knees of the
boy:

“I know her. She is very dear to me. If you don’t mind, I’ll leave you
now. You are safe with Charley--and some time again I’ll come. I thank
you very much. I really want to do this again--we three----”

Even though his own joy was bewildering, he saw the sudden happiness
of Charley’s sister, who, in spite of all, had been haunted by the
dread of the _afterward_. Now that was gone from her. Relief was
in her face. It was all so much better than she had dared to hope. He
had wanted nothing--except to be kind--and now he was going. She gave
her hand impulsively.... Charley did, too, and was ordered to call a
carriage for his sister if he wished; at all events, the means was
attended.... Then they saw him making his way forward--putting money
into the hands of ushers, and inquiring the way to the stage.... And
she was there, playing again.


                                   4

SHE was making the people like her. Her effect was gradual.
They had been held by more obvious displays. The instrument seemed
very big for her, but the people liked her all the better for this....
He could not be one with the audience, but the old watching literary
eye--the third eye--caught the sense of the people’s growing delight.
She made them feel that she belonged to them; as if she said:

“I have come back to you. I will do just what you ask. Everything I
have is yours----”

It was different and dearer to John Morning than anything he had ever
known. The picture came clearly to him as he walked around behind....
This was the hour of her return. She had gone from the hearts of her
people long ago to bring back music. It was the beautiful old story
of their sacrifice to send her away. How splendidly she had learned;
how thrillingly they remembered her beginnings. And she had never
forgotten; she would always love and thank them--indeed, she was
happier than any now.... Morning was lost for a moment in his story.

She was approaching, but did not see him yet. The house was pleased
with her, not noisily, but pleasantly. She turned to bow to the
people--and then back toward the wings. She saw him standing there.
Her arms went out to him, though she had not quitted the stage.... The
gesture was new to the people.... It was different from her coming to
him at the Armory.... They were standing together.

“Why don’t you go on again?” a voice said, and with a queer irritation
in the tone.

... She was playing again--and with dash and power.

Morning had to shut his eyes now, really to hear; and yet, he could
not summon her face to mind when his eyes were shut. He thought with
a quick burn of shame that he had once wished her prettier. Sadness
followed, for, it seemed to him, their meeting had been broken. She
belonged to the people and not to him. They loved her.... She was
different. He saw it now. The audience, so pleased and joyous, lifted
her in a way perhaps that he could never do.

It was everywhere--the music. It filled the high, brick-walled stage,
vibrated in the spiral stairways, moved mysteriously in the upper
darkness and immensity. Behind the far wings a man was moving up and
down in a sort of enchantment--no, he was memorizing something. A few
of the far front rows were visible from where Morning stood, and the
forward boxes opposite....

Morning was wandering in a weird land, a hollow land. The woman’s
playing was between him and the world of men; half for them, half for
him. The Memorizer was but another phantom, wandering with the ghost of
a manuscript. Between Morning and the player was only the frail, fluent
current of music. This was a suspense of centuries.... Would she go to
_Them_, or return to Him? The tall, dim canvases were fields of
emptiness and silence, in which he wandered listening, tortured with
tension; and the loft was sunless, moonless, unearthly....

The music ceased. He heard the calling of the other world to her. He
was apart in the shadows. Would she go to them, or would she remember
him, waiting?... She was coming. He heard her step behind the wings.
It was light as a gloved hand upon a table. He was hungry and athirst
and breathless. For the first time he saw that her throat and arms
were bare.... They were standing together again, but the Other Phantom
intercepted.

It was the Memorizing Man. He came forward in an agony of excitement.
“You’ll have to prompt me,” he said to Betty Berry, speaking roughly in
his tension. “It’s my first time with this new dope. I thought I had
it, but I ain’t--and there’s a barrel of it.”

The stage was slightly changed. Morning was thinking how hideous the
work of some men. The Phantom was scourged with the fear of one who was
to do imperfectly what another had written. The woman had carried a
small table and chair to the wings, out of view of the audience and as
near as possible to the Memorizer.... Morning found something soft and
fragrant in his hands. Betty Berry’s wrap, which she had given to him
before going to the table. And now the monologue had begun.... It was
to be humorous.

Betty Berry, standing beside the table, raised her eyes from the paper,
and beckoned to Morning. His first thought was that he might disturb
her prompting, and he hesitated. She looked up again. Then he thought
she might want her wrap. He tiptoed forward and put it around her
shoulders.

“It wasn’t that,” she whispered, her eyes upon the paper. “I wanted you
to keep me company. This is long. Sit down.”

“Won’t _you_--sit down?” he said from behind, very close to her
hair.

She shook her head.... It was peculiar--she standing, and he in the
chair. The soft wrap winged out, and her arm beneath slid across his
shoulder; the hollow of her left arm against his cheek. He kissed it,
and his face burned against its coolness.

She shivered slightly, but did not take her arm away. Now he looked
up into her face--her eyelids drawn, her lips compressed, her gaze
steadily held to the manuscript. The Phantom was carried on by the
alien humor. Laughter was beginning to crackle here and there through
the house. Betty Berry followed with her eyes--just the words.

“I was so glad to find you,” Morning whispered.

Her lips moved.

Matters tumbled over each other in his mind to say to her; he was
thinking sentences rather than words. He knew that it was not well
to talk now, but there seemed so much to say, and so little time. He
caught himself promising to give her understanding, and he told her
that she seemed everything he wanted to know. His cheek was burning as
never before....

The remotest happened. The Phantom faltered in a climax, and covered
the difficulty with a trick--awaiting the line from the wings. Betty
Berry had become rigid. Her eyes would not see the page.

Morning spoke a sentence in a low, carrying way. He had plucked it from
the page painfully near his own eyes. It may be that the Memorizer
righted himself, or that the prompted line was what he needed. Anyway,
he was going again, and rising to the end....

       *       *       *       *       *

The two stood together while the house laughed, recalling the performer.

“Thanks. I caught it fine,” the Phantom said hastily. “Not even the
front rows knew. I was listening for Miss Berry--and your cue came----”

“It went all right,” said Morning.

The other took the manuscript and passed on, rolling a cigarette....
For just a moment, the two were alone. Into each other’s arms they
went, with the superb thoughtlessness of children ... and then they
heard steps and voices.... He wondered that Betty Berry could laugh and
reply to those who spoke to her.... He wanted to escape with her. Never
had he wanted anything so much. He was exhausted, humbled, inspired. To
be out in the street with her--it seemed almost too good to be.... She
was saying good-night and good-bye. He followed, carrying the ’cello.


                                   5

MORNING remembered that he had thought of her once before as having
braids down behind--as if they were boy and girl together, and now it
seemed as if they were wandering through some Holland street. He had
never been in a Holland street, but the sense of it came to him--as he
walked with her, carrying her instrument. His primary instinct was to
turn away from the noise of the cars, and where the lights were less
glaring. Moreover, now that they were alone, the impulse to say many
things had left him.

“We must hurry to the ferry--there is only a few minutes----”

He had known somehow that she was going away--perhaps from something
she had said to the others at the theatre.

“You’re not going way back to--to the Armory?”

“No, to Europe just for a few weeks. I sail to-morrow morning from
Baltimore. All we have to do is to catch the ferry and train. I have
sleeper-tickets--and berth and all----”

“I’ll--I’ll go across on the ferry with you,” he said huskily.

She felt his suffering by her own, and said:

“My old master is there. I am to meet him--I think in Paris--I shall
know when I reach London. There is to be just a few private concerts
and some lessons further from him. For two years we’ve planned to do
this. I go to Baltimore, because it is cheaper to sail from there----”

“And you’ll be back--when?”

“By the first of March--just a few days over three months----”

He was silent for a time, and then asked: “Do you think this is just
like a chance meeting to me--as one meets an old friend in New York?”

“No.”

“I was in a whirl when I saw you,” he said desperately. “It was such a
pretty thing, too--the way I happened to come to the theatre ... and
now you’re going away----”

“Yes--yes--but it’s only a little while----”

“Did you know I was here in New York?”

“I knew you had been. I saw your work----”

“But anywhere my work appears--a letter sent in care of the paper or
magazine would find me----”

“We--I mean women--do not write that way----”

“I know--I know.... But _I_ didn’t have anything but the name,
‘Betty Berry’----”

       *       *       *       *       *

“It seemed that night after I left you at the Armory everyone was
talking about John Morning. And to think I supposed you just a
soldier. Everywhere, it was what John Morning had done, and what he
had endured--and I had spent the afternoon with you. I started to read
that story about your journey, but I couldn’t go on. It seemed that I
would die before I was half through your sufferings.... I would try
to think of the things we said, but they didn’t come back. I couldn’t
rest. I was glad you asked me to come again. I could hardly wait for
the morning--to go back to the Armory----”

He had no answer. They were in a cross-town car.

“But I think I understand. We won’t say anything of that again....”

“You went back to the Armory that next morning?”

“Yes----”

“Oh, but I wasn’t ready,” he said at last, as if goaded by pain. “I had
so much to learn. Why, I had to learn this--how little this means----”

He pointed out of the windows to the city streets.

“You mean New York?”

“Yes----”

“It really seems as if men must learn that, first of all. You have done
well to learn so soon.”

“It’s so different now. I must have been half-unconscious that day when
you came. You were like an angel. I didn’t know until afterward what
it really meant to me.... You remember the men who came--newspaper
men? They showed me what I could do in New York--how I could make the
magazines and the big markets. I was knocked-out. You must see it--all
I wanted to do in coming years--to make what seemed the real literary
markets--all was to be done in a few weeks.... It was not until I was
on the train that night that I remembered you were a living woman, and
had come to me.... Then I didn’t know what to do.... But ever since I
have thought of that afternoon, every day....”

They boarded the ferry and moved away from the rest of the people.

“I hate to have you go,” he said. The words were wrung from him. They
were such poor and common words, but his every process of thought
repeated them. He looked back the years, and found a single afternoon
in the midst of passionate waste--the single afternoon in which she
came.... She was everything to him. He wanted to go on and on this way,
carrying her ’cello. He could ask no more than to have her beside him.
He had learned the rest--it was trash and suffering. He wanted to tell
her all he knew--not in the tension of this momentary parting--but
during days and years, to tell his story and have her sanction upon
what was done, and to be done. She was dear; peace was with her.... She
would tell him all that was mysterious; together they would be One Who
Knew. Together they would work--do the things that counted, and learn
faith....

She took the ’cello from him, so that he could carry to the Pullman her
large case checked in the Jersey station.... It was very quiet and dark
in the coach. All the berths were made up but one, in which they sat
down.... They were alone. It was perfect.

“I can’t go back now. I’ll go on with you to Trenton.... I have thought
so much of meeting you.... When the men came that day to the Armory
they showed me everything that seemed good then--fame and money waiting
in New York. It seemed that it couldn’t wait another day--that I must
go that night.... When the train started (it was like this in Oakland)
I thought of you--of you, back in ’Frisco and coming to the Armory in
the morning. It broke me. But I wasn’t right--not normal. I had worked
like a madman--wounds and all. I worked like a madman in New York----”

She put her hand on his. Her listening centered him. That was it--as if
he had not been whirling true before.... Her hand, her listening, and
he was himself--eager to give her all that was real.

“It’s so good to have you here,” she said in a low, satisfied way.
“Will you be able to get a train back all right?”

“Yes.” Now he thought of Charley and his sister.

“It was such a good little thing that brought me to you,” he said.
“One of the little things that I never thought of before,” he told her
hurriedly.

“They are very wonderful--those little things, as you call them.... A
person is so safe in doing them----”

“I must tell Duke Fallows about that,” he added. “About that word
‘safe,’ as you just said it.... Did you read his story?”

“About the _Ploughman_?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, it was wonderful!” Betty Berry said. “He made me see it. It was
almost worth a war to make people see that----”

She stopped strangely. He was bending close, watching her.

“Do you know you are a love-woman?”

“You mean something different?” she asked queerly.

“I mean you are everything--don’t you see? You know everything at once
that I have to get bruised and tortured to know. And when you are here,
I know where I am. It’s different from any kind of resting to be here
with you. It’s kind of being made over. And then you are so--tender----”

“You make the tears come, John Morning.”

Now, it was very dark where they were; the real silences began. He knew
the most wonderful thing about her--her listening.... Sometimes, she
seemed hardly there. Sometimes the love for her and the sweet quality
of it all--shut his throat, and he stared away in the dark. It came to
him that Betty Berry--left to herself--would be infallible. She might
do wrong, through the will of someone else, but her own impulses were
unerringly right. There was delicacy, perhaps, from the long summer
alone, in this sense that he must not impose his will. She would be
unable to refuse anything possible. If ever Betty Berry were forced to
refuse anything he asked, they would never be the same together. And
so he studied her. Her nature was like something that enfolded. It was
like an atmosphere--his own element.

“Betty----”

“Yes.”

“Betty----”

“Yes-----”

And then she laughed and kissed him. He was saying her name in the very
hush of contemplation; so real that the name was all....


                                   6

THE Pullman conductor passing through after Trenton gave
Morning further passage, and moved on with a smile. A wonderful old
darkey was the porter, very huge, past seventy, with a voice purringly
kind, and the genial deference of the Old South. Morning was thinking
there couldn’t be better hands in which to leave the Betty Berry....
Fifteen minutes at Philadelphia; they hurried out for a cup of coffee.
As one of the big station clocks marked the minutes, Morning felt havoc
with a new and different force.

“I can’t go back now,” he said.

“You look so tired--the long night journey back----” she faltered.

“Would you like to have me go farther--to Wilmington--to Baltimore?”

“Oh, yes.”

“And you won’t mind staying up?”

Betty Berry covered her eyes.... “I never rested in quite the same way
as to-night,” she said. “It has been happy--so happy, unexpected. I
shall have nine days at sea to think of it--to play and think of it,
moment by moment.”

“I’ll go with you clear through to the ship then.”

The clock ceased its torment.

“Have you plenty of money to get back--and all?”

“Yes.”

“Are you sure--because I could loan you some?”

He told her again, but the thought held a comradeship that gripped him.
It happened that he was plentifully supplied; though he would have
walked back rather than confess otherwise--a peculiar stupidity. The
beaming of the old porter made the moment at the steps of the coach so
fine, Morning found himself explaining:

“The lady is sailing from Baltimore in the morning. I’ve decided to go
clear through to the pier.”

This was an extraordinary thing for him to explain.

They sat in silence until the train moved, and they could forget the
snoring.... The coach grew colder, and Betty unpacked a steamer rug
which they used for a lap-robe. Even the old darkey went to sleep after
Wilmington.

“Letters--” she said at last. “I have been thinking about that....
There’s no way to tell where I am to be. I won’t know until London,
where I am to meet my old master. Perhaps then I could tell you--but
I daren’t think of letters and risk disappointment.... You must wait
until I write you----”

Morning began to count the days, and she knew what was in his mind.

“That’s just it--one gets to lean on letters. One’s letters are never
one’s self. I know that extended writing throws one out from the true
idea of another. I shall think of to-night during the weeks.... It
seems, we forgot the world to-night. There--behind the scenes--how
wonderful.... There was no thought about it. I just found myself in
your arms----”

“Then I am not to write--until I hear from you?” he asked. It had not
occurred to him before that she could have any deeper reason than an
uncertain itinerary.

“That will be best.... Don’t you see, writing is your work. It will
make you turn your training upon me. Something tells me the peril of
that. As to-night dimmed away--you would force the picture.... Trained
as you, one writes to what he wishes one to be, not to what one is....
You would make me all over to suit--and when I came, there would be a
shock.... And then think if some night--very eager and heart-thumping,
I should reach a city--so lonely and hungry for my letter--and it
shouldn’t be there.... No, to-night must do for me. I shall go on my
way playing and biding my time, until the return steamer. Then some
morning, about the first of March, you shall hear that I am back--and
that I am waiting for my real letter----”

“And where did you learn all this--about a man writing himself out of
the real?” John Morning asked wonderingly.

“If I were to be in one place to receive your letters, I might not have
thought of it--yet it is true.... Then, my letters are nothing. Perhaps
I am a little afraid to write to you. I think with the ’cello----”

“All that seems very old and wise, beyond my kind of thinking,” he said.

For a long time she was listening. It was like that first afternoon....
What did Betty Berry hear continually? It gave him a conception of
what receptivity meant--that quiescence of all that is common, that
abatement of the world and the worldly self, that quality purely
feminine. It was like a valley receiving the afternoon sunlight. He
realized vaguely at first that the mastery of self, necessary for such
listening, is the very state of being saints pray for, and practice
continually to attain.... Perhaps, he thought, this is the way great
powers come--from such listening--the listening of the soul; perhaps
such power would come again and again, if only the strength of it were
turned into service for men; perhaps it was a kind of prayer.... It was
all too vague for him to speak....

She was first to whisper that the dawn had come.

“I love you,” he said.

He saw her eyes with the daylight, as he had not seen them since that
first afternoon--gray eyes, very deep. The same strange hush came to
him from them. And there was a soft gray lustre with the morning about
her traveling-coat; and her brown hair seemed half-transparent against
the panes. No one was yet abroad in the coach.

“I don’t seem to belong at all--except that I love you,” he whispered.

“Tell me--what that means--oh, please----”

“When I think of what I am, and who I am, and what I have been--and
what common things I have done in the stupidity of thinking they were
good,” he explained with a rush of words: “when I think of the dozen
turnings in my life, when little things said or done by another have
kept me from greater shame and nothingness--oh, it doesn’t seem to me
that I belong at all to such a night as this! But when I feel myself
here, and see you, and how dear you are to me, how you wait for my
words, and what happiness this is together--then it comes to me that
I don’t belong to those other things, but only to this--that I could
never be a part of those old thoughts and ways, if you were always
near----”

“And I have waited a long time.... The world has said again and again,
‘He will never come,’ but something deeper of me--something deeper
than plays the ’cello, kept waiting on and on. That deeper me seemed to
know all the time.”

Talking and listening carried them on. John Morning had the different
phases of self segregated in an astonishing way. He spoke of himself
as man can only with a woman--making pictures of certain moments, as a
writer does. Volumes of emotion, they burned, talking and listening,
leaning upon each other’s words and thoughts. They were one, in a very
deep sense of joy and replenishment. They touched for moments the plane
of unity in which they looked with calm upon the parting, but the woman
alone poised herself there. They left the old darkey--a blessing in
his voice and smile. Such passages of the days’ journeys were always
important to Betty Berry.

Morning fell often from the heights to contemplate the journey’s
end and the dividing sea. In spite of his words, in spite of his
belief--his giving was not of her quality of giving. His replenishment
was less therefore.... They moved about the streets of Baltimore in
early morning. The baggage went on to the ship. An hour remained.
Sounds and passing people distracted him. The woman was fresher than
when he had seen her last night, but Morning was haggard and full of
needs.... She was a continual miracle, unlike anything that the world
held--different in every word and nestling and intonation. Much of her
was the child--yet from this _naive_ sweetness, her mood would
change to a womanhood which enfolded and completed him, so that they
were as a globe together. In such instants she brought vision to his
substance; mind to his brain, intuition to his logic, divination to his
reason, affinity to each element--enveloping him as water an island.
The touch of her hand was a kiss; and of her kiss itself, passion was
but the atmosphere; there was earth below and sky above.... She took
him to the state-room where she was to be, “so you will know where I
am when you think of me.”... They heard the knock of heels on the deck
above....

He could not think. He heard them calling for visitors to go ashore....
He thought once it was too late, and when he was really below on the
wharf and she above, and he realized that the wild hope of being taken
away with her, (his own will not entering, as the serpent entered
Eden,) he could hardly see her for the blur--not of tears, but of his
natural rending. Her voice was but one of many good-byes to the shore,
yet it came to him out of the tumult of voices and whistles--as a ewe
to find her own.


                                   7

MORNING heard some one nearby say that so-and-so had not
really sailed, but was just going down the bay.... It was thus he
learned that he might have passed the forenoon with Betty Berry on
the Chesapeake. In fact, there was no reason for him not taking the
voyage.... In a quick rush of thinking, as he stood there on the
piers, all his weaknesses paraded before him, each with its particular
deformity. The sorry pageant ended with a flourish, and he was left
alone with the throb of the unhealed wound in his side.

Betty Berry would not have agreed to let him take the voyage, just for
the sake of being with her. He knew this instinctively, but perhaps it
might have been managed.... To think he had missed the chance of the
forenoon.... The liner was sliding down the passage, already forgotten
by the lower city.... Morning found himself looking into the window of
a drink-shop. Bottles and cases of wine in their dust and straw-coats
were corded in the window, which had an English dimness and look of
age. A quiet place; the signs attested that ales were drawn from
the wood and that many whiskeys of quality were within. Something
of attraction for the spirituous imagination was in the sweet woody
breath that reached him when he opened the door. A series of race-horse
pictures took his mind from himself to better things.

These influences played merely upon the under-surfaces of an
intelligence whose thoughts followed the steamer down the Chesapeake
as certainly as the flock of gulls.... It was that quiet time in the
morning, after the floors are washed. The day was bright, with just a
touch of cold in the air.

... A drink improved him generally. He examined the string of horses
again, and talked to the man behind. The man declared it was his law
not to drink oftener than once in the half-hour, during the forenoon;
he stated that it paid to exert this self-control, as his appetite was
better and he was less liable to “slop over” in the afternoon. Morning
was then informed that oysters were particularly good just now, and
that a man with a weak stomach could live on oysters.... There was just
one little flange of an oyster that was indigestible. The man knew
this because drink makes one dainty about his eating, and one can tell
what agrees with him or otherwise. Furthermore, one could detach the
indigestible flange in one’s mouth before swallowing--anyone could with
practice. The man glanced frequently at the clock.... Well, he would
break over, just once, and make up later. A half hour was sometimes a
considerable portage.... They became companionable.

Morning started back for New York at noon. The particular train he
caught was one of the best of its kind. The buffet, the quality of
service and patronage had a different, an intimate appeal to-day.
He sat there until dark--in that sort of intensive thinking which
seemed very measured and effective to Morning. His chief trend was
a contemplation, of course, of the night before. Aspects appeared
that did not obtrude at all with the woman by him. Considering the
opportunity, he had kissed her very rarely, as he came to think of
it....

His fellow-passengers let him alone. He reflected that he could always
get along with the lower orders of men--with sailors, soldiers,
bartenders; with the Jakes, Jethros, and Jerries of the world. Duke
Fallows had remarked this.... Duke Fallows ... the old Liaoyang
adventure came back more clearly than it had for months.... That
_was_ a big set of doings. Certainly there was a thrill about
those days, when one stopped to think.

At dinner time, approaching the end of the journey, Morning met a
pronounced disinclination to stay on the Jersey side. The little cabin
on the hill was certainly not for this condition of mind. He had
to stop and think that it was only yesterday noon when he left the
cabin. A period of time that flies rapidly, appears strangely long
when regarded from the moments of its closing. The period of the past
thirty hours since he had left the hill was like a sea-voyage. The
lights across the river had a surprising attraction. When he realized
the old steam of alcohol, his mind glibly explained that it was merely
an episode of a sick and overwrought body; that the real John Morning,
of altruism and aspiration, was away at sea with the love-woman, much
cherished, the very soul of him.

More than a half-year before he had fled to the country, weary
to nausea of men in chairs and buffets. The animalism of it had
utterly penetrated him at last; the Conrad study was but one of many
revelations. He had hated the _Boabdil_; and hated more the
processes of his own mind when alcohol impelled. Only yesterday morning
he had hated the whole vanity of New York leisure, with the same
freshness that had characterized his first month of cleanliness. Yet
he found novelty in the present adventure; the prevailing illusion of
which was that he was wrong yesterday rather than now. That night he
sought his old haunts. There was a gladness about it.

“One mustn’t be too much alone,” he decided, “especially if he
is to write.... I must have got cocky sitting there alone by the
cabin-door.... These fellows aren’t so bad....”

Presently he was telling the old story of Liaoyang. That roused him
a little and pulled upon mental fibers still lame.... Was he to be
identified always with that?... A week later he was telling the story
of breaking away from the Russians at Liaoyang and making the journey
alone to Koupangtse. This was in a strangely quiet bar on Eighth
Avenue, in the Forties. A peculiarity about this particular telling of
the story was that he remembered the ferryman on the Hun--the one who
had wakened the river-front as he led Eve down to drink--the ferryman
who was a leper....

As days passed he went down deeper than ever before. “I must have had
this coming----” he would say, and refused to cross the river to rest.
There were moments when he felt too unutterably dirty to go to the
cabin. One day, he kept saying, “I’m going to see this through.” And
on another day he reflected continually (conscious of the cleverness
of the thought) that this drink passage was like the journey to
Koupangtse.... Then there was the occasion when it broke upon him
suddenly that he was being avoided at the _Boabdil_. He never went
back.... One morning he joined some sailors who had breezed in from
afar. They brought him memories and parlances; their ways were his
ways all that day, whose long drift finally brought them to Franey’s
_Lobelia_, as tough and tight a little bar as you would ask any
modern metropolis to furnish. The sailors were down and done-for now,
but Morning stood by for the end, enjoying the place and the wide
bleakness of it.... A slumming party came in about midnight--young men
and women of richness and variety, trying to see bottom by looking
straight down--as if one could see through such dirty water.

The city’s dregs about him--a fabric of idiocy and perversion and
murder--did not look so fatuous nor wicked to Morning’s eye, as did
this perfumed company. They thought they were seeing life, but, deeper
than brain, they knew better; their laughter and their voices were
off the key, because they were not being true to themselves. Franey’s
regulars were glad for the extra drinks, but Morning had a fury. His
shame for the party was akin to the shame he had held for Lowenkampf on
the eve of battle long ago. He arose, short and flaming, yet conscious
even in his rage of the brilliance of his idea.

“You people make me sick,” he said, lurching out. “You’d have to be
_slumee_ to see how silly you look----”

They tried to detain him--to laugh at him--but one woman knew better.
Her low voice of rebuke to her companions was a far greater rebuke to
John Morning at the door.

... Finally he began to wonder how long they would keep on giving him
money at the bank. He turned up every day. No matter what he drew it
was always gone. Sometimes a holiday tricked him, and he suffered. He
watched for Sundays, after he learned.... The banking business was a
hard process, because he had to emerge; had to come right up to the
window and speak to a clean, white man--who had known him before. It
became the sole ascent of Morning’s day--a torturing one. He washed and
shaved for it, when possible, and after a time managed frequently to
save enough to steady his nerves for the ordeal. Then he had to write
his name, and always a blue eye was leveled at him, and he felt the
dirt in his throat.... So he drifted for six weeks, and it was winter.

His descent was abrupt and deep. He tried to get back, and found his
will treacherous. He was prey at times to abominable fears. His body
was unmanageable from illness. There were times when it would have
meant death or insanity not to drink. For the first time in his life
he encountered an inertia that could not be whipped to the point of
reconstructivity. His thoughts cloyed all fine things; his expression
made them mawkish and teary; his emotions overflowed on small matters.
Betty Berry, around whom all this brooding revolved, hardly reached
a plane worthy of interpretation. Morning’s conception of the woman
on the afternoon she came to the Armory, or on the night-trip to
Baltimore, contrasted with this mental apparition of the sixth week:

“She is a professional musician, making her own way in the world, and
taking, as many a man would, the things that please her as she passes.
This is not the great thing to her that it is to me. Other men have
doubtless interested her suddenly and rousingly, and have gone their
way.... Had she been a stranger to a man’s sudden loving she would
never have beckoned me to the chair in the wings that night. She would
never have come to my arms--as I went to hers----”

Sweat broke from him. The savage and abandoned company of thoughts
had ridden down all else, like a troop of raiders, destroying as they
went.... The troop was gone; the shouting died away--but he was left
more lewd and low than the worst. He had defiled the image of the
woman who had given herself so eagerly. He recalled how he had talked
of understanding, how he had praised her in his thoughts because she
was brave enough to be natural, and to act as a natural woman who has
found her own, after years of repression. The other side of the shield
was turned to torture him--the sweet, low-leaning, human tenderness of
Betty Berry, her patience, her endless and ever-varying bestowals. She
had called his the voice of reality, and become silent before it; had
proved great enough to remain undestroyed in a man’s world; her faith
and spirit arose above centuries of lineage in a man’s world--and she
was Betty Berry who knew her lover’s presence, though they were almost
strangers to each other, and opened her arms to him....

It was a hell that he vividly reviewed for seven weeks, and with no
Virgil to guide. A scene or two from the final day is enough:

... He had come from the bank about one in the afternoon, and had taken
a chair in the bar of the _Van Antwerp_. He was neither limp
nor sprawling, but in a condition of queer detachment from exterior
influences. He knew that it was daylight; heard voices but no words,
and carried himself with the rigid effort of one whose limbs are
habitually flippant. Perhaps it was because he was so very generous
to the waiter that he was allowed to close his eyes without being
molested. In any event, his consciousness betrayed him, and away he
went in the darkness of dream: The Ferryman of the Hun was poling
away at the stream and he, John Morning, was but one of a company in
passage. It was not the Hun river this time; the sorrel Eve was not
there. Not alone the Ferryman, but all on board were lepers--he, John
Morning in the midst of them, a leper. The old wound was witness to
this.... They tried to land at the little towns but natives came forth
and drove them away. Down, down stream they went and always natives
came forth to warn them as they neared the land.... Even when they drew
in to the marshes and the waste-places natives appeared and stoned them
away.... And so they went down--to the ocean and the storm and Morning
opened his eyes.

Opposite, his back to the marble bar, his elbows braced against the
rail, stood Mr. Reever Kennard, watching him, and the look upon the
face of the famous correspondent was that of scornful pity--as if there
was a truce to an old enmity, no longer worth while.

Still later on that day, over on Second Avenue, Morning almost bumped
into a small yellow sign at the elevator entrance to the Metal Workers’
Hall, to the effect that Duke Fallows was to address a gathering there
that night.


                                   8

A FLASH of love came to his heart for Duke Fallows at the
sight of the name. There was nothing maudlin about this; rather, a
decent bit of stamina in the midst of sentimental overflows. It was
the actual inside relation, having nothing to do with the old surface
irritation.... Morning took care of himself as well as he could during
the day. He meant to mix with the crowd at the meeting, but not to make
himself known until he was free from vileness. He would keep track of
the other’s place and movements in New York. When he was fit--there
would be final restoration in the meeting. His heart thumped in
anticipation. The yellow poster had turned the corner for him. These
first thoughts of the upward trend are interesting:

He meant to cross the river and build a big fire in the cabin. There
he would fight it out and cleanse the place meanwhile, in preparation.
He pictured the cabin-door open, water on the floor, the fire burning,
the smell of soap. He would heat water, wash his blankets, put them out
in the sun; polish his kettles with water and sand. Every detail was
important, and how strangely his mind welcomed the freshness of these
simple thoughts. The glass of the windows would flash in the morning,
and the door of oak would gleam with its oil.... Finally he would bring
Duke there.

This was the triumph of it all. He would bring the sick man home;
tend the fire for him, go to the dairyman’s for milk and eggs. They
could call Jake and talk to him--seeing the heart of a simple man....
They would talk and work together ... the sick man looking up at the
ceiling, and he, Morning, at the machine as in the old days. Spring
would come, the big trees would break their buds and sprinkle the
refuse down--and, God, it would be green again--all this rot ended....
So the days would pass quickly until Betty Berry came.... Duke would be
glad to hear of her.

... That night Morning went in with the workers to their Hall and sat
far back. The meeting had been arranged under socialistic auspices;
seven hundred men at least were present. Through the haze of pipe,
cigarette, and cigars, Duke Fallows came forth.

And this was no sick man. His knees were strong, and there was a
lightness of shoulder that did away with the huddle of old times. His
eyes shone bright under the hanging lamp, and his laugh was as far as
Asia from scorn. There was brown upon him; his hands, when they fell
idle, were curved as if to fit a broad-ax, and “I’m glad to be with
you, men,” he said.

“... I have come to tell you a story--my story. Every man has one. I
never tell mine twice the same, but some time I shall tell it just
right, and then the answer shall come.”

Power augmented in the silence of the smoky hall. The gathering
recognized the artist that had come down to them, because he loved
the many and belonged with them. They gave him instinctively the rare
homage of uncritical attention. Fallows told of Liaoyang--of the whole
preparation--of the Russian singing, the generals, the systems by
which men were called to service. Always the theme that played through
this prelude was the millet of Manchuria. He told of the great grain
fields, the feeding troop-horses, the hollows between the hills--how
the ancient Chinese city stood in a bend of the river--of the outer
fighting, the rains, the mass of men, the Chinese.

This new Duke Fallows hated no man; had no scorn for the Russian
chiefs. His ideas of service and humanity concerned Russia rather than
Japan--and not the imperialistic Russia, but the real spirit--the
toiler, the dreamer, the singer, the home-maker--the Russia that was
ready, perhaps as ready as any people in the world, to put away envy,
hatred, war; to cease lying to itself, and to grasp the reality that
there is something immortal about simplicity of life and service for
others. What concerned this Russia, Fallows declared, concerned the
very soul of the western world.

He placed the field for the battle in a large way--the silent, watery
skies, all-receiving _kao-liang_, and the moist earth that held
the deluges. Morning choked at the picture; the action came back again
as Fallows spoke--Lowenkampf himself--the infantry of Lowenkampf
slipping down the ledges into the grain--Luban, machine-guns, rout--the
little open place in the millet where the Fallows part of the battle
was fought.

“... He was a young Russian peasant. If he came into this hall now,
we would all know instinctively that he belonged to us. He was fine
to look upon that day, coming out of the grain--earnest, glad, his
heart turned homeward. His enemy was not Japan, but Imperialism, and
defeat was upon it. This defeat meant to him, as it did to hundreds
of soldiers in that hour--the beginning of the road home. Luban was
burning with the shame of detected cowardice. A common soldier had
commented upon it in passing. And now this young Russian peasant met
the eyes of Luban, and the two began to speak, and I was there to
listen.

“The peasant said that this was not his war; that he had been forced
to come; that it meant nothing to him if Russia took Manchuria; but
that it meant a very great deal to him--this being away--because his
six babies were not being fed by the Fatherland, and his field was not
being ploughed.

“It was very simple. You see it all. The Fatherland forced starvation
upon a man’s children, while his field remained unploughed. Only a
simple man could say it. You must be straight as a child to speak such
epics. It is what you men have thought in your hearts.

“Of course, Luban only knew he was an officer and the man was not.
Machine-guns were drumming in the distance, and the grain was hot and
breathless all about. The forward ranks were terribly broken--the
soldiers streaming back past us. Luban, who opened the discussion, was
getting the worst of it, and his best reply was murder. He handled the
little automatic gun better than the cause of the Fatherland--shot the
_Ploughman_ through the breast. I thrust him back to take the
falling one in my arms....

“We seemed alone together. There was power upon me. Even in the
swiftness and tumult of the passing I made the good man see that I
would father his babes, look to the ploughing of his field, and be
the son of his mother. His passing made all clear to me. His message
was straight from the heart of the world’s suffering poor, from the
heavy-laden. He spoke to kings and generals, and to all who have and
are blind. There in the havoc of the retreat, dying in my arms--he
made it vivid as the smiting sun of Saul--that this hideous disorder
of militia was not his Fatherland. He would have fought for the real
Fatherland. He was a son in spirit, and a state-builder; he would have
fought for that; he was not afraid to die....

“Love for him had come strangely to my heart, men. I said to him--words
I cannot remember now--something I had never been able to write,
because I had not written for men before, but for some fancied elect.
I made him know that he had done well, that his field would bring
forth, and that his house would glow red with firelight.... I think my
Ploughman felt as I did even before his heart was still--that there is
something beyond death in the love of men for one another.... It was
wonderful. We forgot the battle. We forgot Luban and the firing. We
were one. His spirit was upon me--and the good God gave him peace.

“I tell you quietly, but don’t you see--this that I bring so quietly
is the message from the Ploughman who passed--the message of Liaoyang?
And this is the sentence of it: Where there is a real Fatherland--there
will be Brotherhood.

“The world is so full of pallor and agony and sickness and stealing.
First, it is because of the Lubans. The Lubans are sick for power--sick
with their desires. Having no self-mastery, they are lost and full of
fear. They fear the whip, they fear poverty and denial; theirs is a
continual fear of being stripped to the nakedness of what they are--as
old Mother Death strips a man. In the terror of all these things they
seek to turn the whip upon others, to reinforce their emptiness with
exterior possessions. Because their souls are dying, and because they
feel the terror of sheer mortality, they seek to kill the virtue in
other men. Because they cannot master themselves, they rise in passion
to master others. They could not live but for the herds.

“We who labor are the strength of the world. I say to you, men, poverty
is the God’s gift to His elect. It is to us who have only ourselves
to master--that the dream of Brotherhood can come true. It is alone
to us, who have nothing, that these possessions can come, which old
Mother Death is powerless to take away. And we who labor and are
heavy-laden are making our colossal error to-day. We are the muttering
herds. Standing with the many we may not know ourselves. We look upon
the cowardice and emptiness of the Lubans and call it Power. We see
the ways of the Herd-drivers--and dream of driving others, instead of
ourselves. We look upon the Herd-drivers--and turn upon them the same
thoughts of envy and hatred and cruelty--which cuts them off from
every source of power and leaves them empty and cowardly indeed.

“These are the thoughts of the herds--and yet down in the muscling
mass men are not to blame. It takes room for a man to be himself--it
takes room for a man to love his neighbor and to master himself.
Terrified, whipped, packed, sick with the struggle and the strain of it
all--how can men, turning to one another, find brotherhood in the eyes
of their fellows. Living the life of the laboring herds in the great
cities--why, it would take Gods to love men so!... The world is so full
of pallor and agony and sickness and stealing--first, because of the
Lubans, and, second, because of the City.... And after Liaoyang, I went
straight to the Ploughman’s house--for I had given my word. And now I
will tell you what I found on the little hill-farm up in the Schwarenka
district among the toes of the Bosk mountains, a still country.”


                                   9

“I REMEMBER the soldiers at Liaoyang, the last thing, the many
who had grasped at the hope that defeat meant the end of the war. They
were learning differently as I left. Hundreds gave up from the great
loneliness.... I carried the name of my Ploughman across the brown
country, and the northern autumn was trying to hold out against the
frosts. Asia is desolate. We who are white men, and who know a bit of
the loveliness of life--even though we labor at that which is not our
life--we must grant that the Northern Chinese have learned this: To
suffer quietly.

“Baikal was crossed at last. On and on by train into the West--until I
came to the little village that he had said. For days it had been like
following a dream. Sometimes it seemed to me so wonderful--that young
man coming out of the millet, and what he said--that I thought it must
have come to me in a vision, that I was mad to look for his town and
the actual house in the country beyond. Yet they knew his name in the
little town, and said that early next morning I could get a wagon to
take me to the cabin, which was some _versts_ away.

“I had known so much of cities. For weeks I had been in the noises
of the Liaoyang fighting and in trains. Moreover, I had been ill
for a long time, too--a crawling, deadly illness. But that night my
soul breathed. I ate black bread by candle-light and drank milk. The
sharpness of mid-October was in the air. You will laugh when I say it
seemed to me, an American, as if I had come home. In the morning early
I looked away to the East, from whence I had come, and where the sun
was rising. (The ceiling of the little room was so low I had to bend my
head.) To the north the mountains were sharp in the morning light and
shining like amethyst.... I left the wagon at the first sight of the
hut in the distance, and I reached there in the warmth of the morning.

“An old man was sitting in the sun. He asked me to have bread, and said
they had some sausage for the coming Sunday. This was mid-week. A child
brought good water. Then I heard the cane of the old woman, and saw
her hand first, as it thrust the cane out from the door--all brown and
palsied, the hand, its veins raised and the knuckles twisted from the
weight that bent her fingers against the curve of the stick. The rest
was so pure. She had been a tall woman--very thin and bent and white
now. When I looked into that face I saw the soul of the Ploughman. I
can tell you I wanted to be there. It was very strange.... I can see
her now, looking up at me, as the old do from their leaning. It was
like the purity and distance of the morning. I trembled, too, before
this old wife, for the fact in my mind about her son. I tell you, old
mother-birds are wise.

“It was as if my garments smelled of the fighting. She knew whence I
had come; she looked into my soul and found the death of her son. Her
soul knew it, but not her brain yet. She may have found my love for
him, too--the deep bond between us.

“‘Ask the stranger to stay. We will have sausage by the Sunday,’ said
the old man. His thought was held by hunger.

“‘Hush, Jan--he comes from our son----’

“‘And where are the children and the young mother?’ I asked.

“‘They are out for faggots in the bush--they will come----’

“I had thought, as I traveled, (the thoughts of the weeks on the road,)
to do many things; to give them plentifully of money; to arrange for
someone to do the late fall and winter work. I had intended to go on,
when sure that everything was at hand to make them comfortable. I
tell you, men, it was all too living for that. One could not perform
unstudied benefits for the mother of the Ploughman. There was more than
money wanted there.

“‘We would like to have you stay with us,’ the mother said, ‘but our
poverty is keen, and we have not bread enough now for the winter.... He
was taken long before the harvest, and it is long until the grain comes
again----’

“‘But if he were here--what would be done, Mother?’

“‘Ah, if he came,’ she said strangely. ‘If he came----’

“The father now spoke:

“‘He would cut wood for our neighbors this winter--when the ploughing
was finished. That would provide food--good food. Oh, he would know
what to do--our Jan would know----’

“I won’t soon forget that high, wavering voice of the old man--‘Oh, he
would know what to do--our Jan is a good son----’ and the shake of his
head.

“‘But may I not do some of the things that he would do?’

“I had to say it twice, for I spoke their language poorly. I had
understood the son at Liaoyang--but all moments were not like those in
which he spoke to me.

“‘And then,’ I added hastily, ‘he sent you some money----’

“I dared not offer much with that pure old face looking at me. The
silver and gold that was in my purse I put in her lap.

“‘Oh, it is very much--the good God brought you from him, did he not?’

“‘And we will not need to wait until Sunday for----’

“‘Hush--Jan--no, we will not need to wait.’

“... And then the young mother came. I saw her steps quicken when
yet she was far off. The little ones were about her--all carrying
something. The older children were laughing a little, but the others
were quiet in their haste and effort to keep up.... There was one
little boy, but I will tell you afterward of the littlest Jan.... There
was a pallor over the brood. Their health was pure, and their blood
strong, but that pallor had come. Men, it was hunger already. Here were
the fields, and the Fatherland had taken him before the harvest. This
thing, the shocking truth of it; that this actually could be; that
a country could do such a thing--made me forget everything else for
the moment. Then I realized that I must keep the truth from the young
mother. Before I spoke at all they told her that I had come from her
husband.

“Her lips were white, her breasts wasted. She was lean from hunger,
lean from her bearing. Young she was for the six, but much had she
labored, and there was a mountain wildness in her eyes. She was
stilled, as the old mother had been, by the fear of hearing her man’s
death. She dared not ask. She accepted what was said--that I had come
from him, that I had brought money, and wished to stay for a little....
She leaned against the door, the smaller children gathering at her
knees, the others putting away the wood. Her single skirt hung square,
and her arms seemed very long, nearly to her knees; her hands loose
and tired. Her hair was yellow; the wind had tossed it. You know how
a horse that has been listening, suddenly catches his breath again.
The same sound came from her as she started to breathe again.... One
of the smaller children laughed, and I looked down. It was the little
four-year-old, the third Jan of that house, and he was close to my
knees, looking up at me ... and we were all together.

“I loved the world better after that look of the child into my eyes....
I took him on my shoulder. We went to the village together. That night
the wagon brought us back; there was much food.... And that was my
house. I looked out on the mountains the next day, and for many days to
come, and, men--their grand sky-wide simplicity poured into my heart. I
took the old horse out, and we ploughed during the few days remaining.
There was not much land--but we ploughed it together to the end, when
the frost made the upturned clods ring. Then I strawed up the shed for
the old horse to pass his winter in warmth, and brought blankets for
him. I respected that old horse. Health and good-fellowship had come
to me as we worked together. I remember the sharp turning of the early
afternoons from yellow to gray and to dark.... Then we went into the
bush together in the early winter days. The ax rang, and the snow-bolt
was piled high each day with wood. The smell of the wood-smoke in the
morning air had a zest for my nostrils I had never known before, and
at night the cabin windows were red with fire-light. We were all one
together. And I think the spirit of the Ploughman was there in the
happiness.

“Sometimes in the night when I would get up to replenish the fire--the
mystery of plain goodness would come to me. I would see the children
and others all around. Then at the frosty window, shading the fire
from my eyes, I looked out upon the snows. I was unable to contain the
simple grandeurs that had unfolded to me day by day.... And then I
would go back to the blankets where the little boy lay--his hand always
fumbling for me as I crept in. The love that I felt for this child was
beyond all fear. We could stand together against any fate. And one
night it came to me that from much loving of one a man learns to love
the many, and that I would really be a man when I learned to love the
world with the same patience and passion that I loved the little boy.
The Ploughman came along in a dream that night and said it was all
quite true.

“And that was the winter.... I wish you could have seen this sick
man who had come. I had lain on my back for months, except when some
great effort aroused me. I had that coming on, men, which makes a man
walk--as a circus bear turns and totters on his back feet. The house,
the field, the plough, the horse, woods, winter, and mountains, love
for the child, love for all the others--the much that my hands found to
do and the heart found to give--these things made me new again. These
simple sound and holy things.

“I had been a sick man mentally and morally, too, sick with ego and
intellect--a nasty sickness. But one could not look, feeling the joy
in which I lived, upon the snows of the foothills, nor afar through
the yellow winter noons to the gilded summits of the Bosks; one could
not look into the eyes of the children, the last vestige of hunger
pallor gone from them; one could not talk of tobacco-and-sausage with
the old man by his fireside; nor watch the mysterious great givings
of the two mothers--their whole lives giving--pure instruments of
giving--passionate givers, they were; givers of life and preservers of
life--I say, men, one could not live in this purity and not put away
such evil and cruel things.... As the sickness of the blood went from
me--so that sickness of mind.... And, I tell you, we were ready as a
house could be, when the news came officially that our Ploughman was
among the missing from the battle of Liaoyang.

“It was sharper than any winter night. We stood in the cabin and
wept together. Then in the hush--the real thought of it all came
to one--to whom, do you think?... She was on her knees--_the old
mother_--praying for the other peasant cabins in Russia--the
thousands of others from which a son and husband was gone--‘cabins to
which the good God has not sent such a friend.’... I tell you, men,
all the evil of past days seemed washed from me in that hour.... And
that is my home. (The old horse and I opened the fields again in the
springtime.)

“After that I went down to Petersburg to tell my story, and to Moscow.
I have told it in cellars and stables--in Berlin, in Paris, and London.
I am making the great circle--to tell it here--and on, when we are
finished, to Chicago, to Denver and San Francisco--and then the long
sail homeward, following the first journey to the foothills of the Bosk
range. I will go to my old mother there, and to the little boy, who
looked up into my eyes--as if we were born to play and talk and sleep
together.

“The days of the conscript gangs are over here, men. Such days are
numbered, even in Russia. They don’t come to your door in this country
and take you away from your work to fight across the world--but the
Lubans are here--and the cities are full of horror. It is in the
cities where the herds are, where the little Lubans whip, and the
bigger Lubans thrive. In the pressure and heaviness of the cities--the
thought that comes to the herd is the old hideous conception of the
multitude--that the way of the Lubans is the way of life.... It isn’t
the way. The way of life has nothing to do with greed, nor with envy,
nor with schemes against the bread of other men. It is a way of peace
and affiliation--of standing together. And you who have little can go
that way; you who labor can go that way--because you are the strength
of the world. Don’t resist your enemies, men--leave them. The Master
of us all told us that. And when the herds break, and this modern hell
of the city is diminished--the Lubans will follow you out--whining and
bereft, they will follow you out, as the lepers of Peking follow the
caravans to the gates and beyond.... I have told you of my home--the
little cabin that came to me from the beginnings of compassion. And
there is such a home for every man of you--in the still countries where
the voice of God may be heard.”

Morning, desperately ill, rose to leave the hall. In the momentary
hush, as he reached the door, the voice of Duke Fallows was raised
again, calling his name.


                                  10

“JOHN----” a second time.

Morning turned, his arms lifted despairingly.

“Wait, John, I’ll join you!”

Fallows came down.... The man who gently held the door shut smiled with
strange kindness. There was a shining of kindness in men’s faces....
Morning did not feel that he belonged. He was broken and shamed.... The
big man was upon him--the long arms tossed about him.

“I’ve been looking and listening for you too long, John, to let you go.”

“... I just wanted to hear you. I’m shot to pieces, Duke; I’ll get a
few drinks and wait for you. Then, you’ll see, I’m all out of range of
the man you are----”

There was no answer. Morning looked up to find the long bronzed face
laughing, the eye gleaming. Fallows turned to the doorman and another,
saying:

“Both of you go with him. He needs a drink or two, and one of you come
back to show me the way to him--when I’m through here.... This is a
great night for us, John.”

The three went down in the elevator.... And so the sick man had not
come back--the dithyrambic Duke Fallows was gone for good. The sick
man was strong; the impassioned phrase-maker had risen to the simple
testimony of service. From scorn and emotion, from judgment and
selection, he had risen to the plane of loving kindness.... The air in
the street refreshed him a little. Morning found a bar.

“I’ve been drinking,” he said to the men. “Fallows is a king. I
was there with him at Liaoyang.... Maybe you saw my story in the
_World-News_.... He stayed in the grain with Luban. I went on to
see the cavalry fight.... I came back home to do the story. He went on
to Russia on the _Ploughman_ story----”

“Is he a preacher?” said one of the men.

“Yes--but he learned about war and women first.”

“I’ll take a soft drink and go back. You stay here, and I’ll bring him
to you,” the same one went on.

The other drank with Morning and agreed that they would not leave until
Fallows came.

“And so he learned about war and women first,” he said queerly, when
they were alone. “But he has been a laboring man----”

“Yes. You heard him.”

“But before that farm in Russia----”

“Oh, yes; he was a laborer.”

“Well, he certainly got the crowd with him,” the man acknowledged.

“You know why, don’t you?” Morning said impressively.

“No.”

“He’s _for_ the crowd. People feel it.”

“Oh, I knew that.”

There was quiet, and then the face turned to Morning:

“Say, how did you get such a start as this? This kind means weeks----”

“It got away from me before I knew it. I must have got to gambling with
myself to see how far I could go.”

“Are you going to quit?”

A mist filled Morning’s mind. The question seemed an infringement. Then
it occurred to him how he had fallen to lying to himself.

“He’ll make you quit, but don’t let him stop you too short. You’d be a
wreck in a few hours. You see how you needed these two or three drinks?”

... Fallows entered with several of the committee. He had promised to
speak to them again.

“It’s what I came for,” he was saying. “So long as I am wanted I’ll
stay.... Yes, I’m a socialist.... Yes, I believe in fighting, but when
our kind of men stand together, there won’t be anything big enough to
give us a fight. When our kind of men look into one another’s eyes and
find service instead of covetousness--there’s nothing in the world to
stand against us.”

Fallows and Morning were in a steam-room together two hours afterward.
Morning was limp and light-headed. He had told of some of the
things that had happened since Baltimore--of men he had met--of the
slummers--of harrowing nights and waiting for the bank to open.

“You had to have it, John?”

There was something in the way Fallows spoke the word, _John_,
that made Morning weaker and filled his throat. He had to speak loudly
for the hissing of the steam.

“Why, if you didn’t get humble and stay humble after such a
training--you’d be the poorest human experiment ever undertaken by
the Master. But you can’t fail. It isn’t in the cards to fail. You’ve
ridden several monsters--Drink, Ambition, Literature--but they won’t
get you down. Why, even the sorrel mare didn’t kill you, as I promised
aforetime. I saw a lot in that story. You loved her to the last. You
left her dead and hunched on an alien road. You’ve loved these others
long enough. You’ll leave them dead--even that big fame stuff. I think
you’ve ridden that pompous fool to death already. They are all passages
on the way to Initiation. Your training for service is a veritable
inspiration--and you’ll write to men--down among men. I love that
idea--you’ll write the story of Compassion--down among men----”

Fallows’ face came closer through the steam. He scrutinized the wound
that wouldn’t heal. “Did you ever hear about Saint Paul’s thorn in the
flesh?... ‘And lest I be exalted above measure through the abundance of
revelations, there was given me a thorn in the flesh--?’ It all works
out. You’ll have to excuse me. The Bible was the only book I had with
me up in the Bosk country. I found it all I wanted. I would take it
again.... Yes, John, it’s all right with you.”

Morning was telling of that afternoon at the Armory. He passed over
quickly the period of worldly achievement in New York to the quiet
blessedness he had hit upon, finding the hill and the elms.

“That’s the formula--to get alone and listen----”

“That’s what you preached to-night, wasn’t it?”... Presently he was
back to Betty Berry again--finding her at the ’cello--the wonderful
ride to Baltimore--which brought him to the drink chapter once
more.... He couldn’t see Duke’s face as he spoke of the woman. There
was a peculiar need of the other saying something when he had finished.
This only was offered:

“We won’t talk about that now, John.... You’d better take another
little drink. Your voice is down.... You’ll be through after a day or
two, and I’ll stay with you----”

“We’ll go over to the cabin to-morrow,” said Morning.

They were lying cot by cot in the cooling-room, and the talk for a time
concerned Lowenkampf, his court-martial and discharge.

“Do you know how I thought of you coming back, Duke?” Morning whispered
afterward.

“Tell me.”

“I always thought of you coming back a sick man--staring at the ceiling
as you used to--sometimes talking to me, sometimes listening to what
I had written. But the main thought was how I would like to take care
of you. I was rotten before. I wanted you sick, so I could show you
better.”

The huge hand stretched across from cot to cot.

“It was afterward--that all the things you said in Liaoyang came back
to me right.... We were lying in ’Frisco waiting for quarantine, and my
stuff was finished the second time, before I read your letter to me and
the one to Noyes--and the Ploughman story. That was the first time I
really saw it right. There was a little doctor with me--Nevin--who got
it all from the first reading. At Liaoyang we were down too low among
the fighting to get it. That Ploughman story made my big yarn look like
a death-mask of the campaign. Betty Berry got it too.... It was the
same to-night--why, you got those men, body and soul.”

“I’d like to think so, John; but I’m afraid you’re wrong. It was just
a seed to-night. Men need to be cultivated every day in a thousand
ways.... Women get things quicker; they can listen better.... The last
night before Jesus was taken by the Roman soldiers, he told the Eleven
that he could be sure only of them. He knew that of the multitude that
heard him--most would sink back. He counted on just the Eleven, and
built his church on the weakest, upon the most unstable--counting only
on the strength of the weakest link.... The fact is, John, I’m only
counting on you. I’ve got to count on you.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Less than five weeks had elapsed, and yet the worst seemed as far
back, in some of Morning’s moments, as the deck-passage out of China.
He had suffered abominably. Fallows stood by night and day at first.
He brought back a certain quality from the Russian farm that was pure
inspiration to the other. They spoke about the Play. Morning was more
than ever glad that Markheim had refused it. They sat long by the
fire. More happened than modern America would believe off-hand--for
John Morning began to learn to listen. Fallows was happy. His presence
in the room was like the fire-light. Twice more he went across to the
Metal Workers’ Hall, and still the New York group would not let him
go. The Socialists brought him their ideas. He was in the heart of
threatening upheavals. He reiterated that they must be united in one
thing first; they must have faith in one another. They must not answer
greed with greed. They must be sure of themselves; they must have
a pure voice; they must know first what was wanted, and follow the
vision.... Duke Fallows knew that it was all the matter of a leader....
He told them of the men and women in Russia who have put off self.
Finally Duke appeared to see that his work was done, and he retired
from them.

“It is delicate business,” he said to Morning. “There’s fine stuff
in the crowd--then there’s the rest. If I should show common just
once--all my work would be spoiled, and even the blessed few would
forget the punch of my little story. They think I’ve gone on west.”

Still he didn’t leave the cabin on the hill.

It was only when Morning undertook to touch upon the love story--that
Fallows looked away.... Morning tried to comprehend this. Something
had happened. The big man who had stared at so many ceilings of Asia,
breaking out from time to time in strange utterances all colored with
desire; the man who had met his Eve, and talked of being controlled by
her even after death--shuddered now at the mention of Betty Berry....
Morning even had a suspicion at last that the other construed a
relation between the woman’s influence and the excess of alcohol. These
moments dismayed him.

There is a dark spot in every man’s radiance--and this was the
Californian’s, Morning concluded. In the transformation which the
journey to Russia had effected, his particular weakness seemed hardened
into a crust of exceptional austerity. The only women he ever spoke
of in the remotest personal fashion belonged to the peasant family of
the Ploughman. His audiences were unmixed by his own arrangement. In
tearing out his central weakness, a certain madness on the subject had
rushed in, a hatred that knew no quarter, and a zeal in denial that
only one who has touched the rim of ruin can know.

On the last night of February they talked and read late. The reading
was from Saint Paul in the different letters. Fallows seemed
impassioned with the figure.

“I understand him,” he said.

“He was afraid of women. Sometimes he seems to hate women,” Morning
remarked. Certain lines of Paul’s on the subject had broken the
perfection of the message for him.

A strange look came to Fallows. The finger that was turning a page
drew in with the others, and the hand that rested upon the book was
clenched.... “Paul knew women,” he muttered.

“You think before he took that road to Damascus--he knew women?”

“Yes----”

“Even the Paul who stood by holding the garments of the stoners of
Stephen?”

“He was a boy then. He learned afterward, I think.”

“He couldn’t have known the saints among them,” said Morning, who was
smiling in his heart.

“Perhaps some saint among them was the one who made him afraid. You
know women won’t have men going alone--not even the saints among
women.... There may have been one who refused to be dimmed altogether
even by that great light.”

“But he went alone----”

“In that way she wouldn’t be the Thorn,” Fallows said slowly. “She
would be greater power for him. Yes, Saint Paul went alone. We wouldn’t
be reading him to-night--had he turned back to her.”

That hurt. Morning was no longer smiling within. “I didn’t learn
women--even as a boy,” he said.

Fallows was unable to speak. He had never loved Morning as at this
moment. He was tender enough to catch the strange pathos of it, which
the younger man could not feel.

“You’re a natural drunkard, John,” he said presently. “You are by
nature ambitious, as it is intimated Cæsar was; but you are naturally a
monk, too. I say it with awe.”

“You are wrong,” Morning said with strength. “When this woman came into
the room at the Armory that first day--it was as if she brought with
her the better part of myself----”

“You said that same before. You were sick. You were torn by exhaustion
and by that letter of mine about Reever Kennard. It was the peace and
mystery a woman always brings to a sick man.... _Your_ woman
is your genius, John. Any rival will stifle and defame it. It’s the
woman in a man that makes him a prophet or a great artist. Your ego is
masculine; your soul is feminine. When you learn to keep the ego out
of the brain, and use the soul, you will become an instrument, more or
less perfect, for eternal utterances. When you achieve the union of the
man and woman in you--that will be your illumination. You will have
emerged into the larger consciousness. You are not so far as you think
from that high noon-light. If you should take a woman in the human
way, you will not achieve in this life the higher marriage, of which
the union of two is but a symbol. That would be turning back, with the
spiritual glory in your eyes--back to the shadow of flesh.”

“How do you know that?” Morning asked coldly.

“Because of the invisible restraints that have kept you from women so
far.... I believe you are prepared to tell men something about the
devils of drink and ambition--having met them?”

“It is possible.”

“I speak with the same authority.”

Morning did not accept this authority, but was long disturbed after the
light was out.... Her ship had been six days at sea.

They opened the door wide to the first morning of March. Snow was upon
the hill, but there was a promise in the air, even in the sharpness
of it. The wind came in, searched among the papers of the table,
disordered the draughts of the chimney, filling the room with a faint
flavor of wood-smoke, that perfect incense. They stood there, testing
the day, and each was thinking of the things of the night before.
Fallows said:

“John, you didn’t build this cabin with the idea of a woman coming?”

“No; it was built before I found her the second time. It was my
escape from _Boabdil_.... But I thought of her coming, many
times afterward--just as I thought of you coming back to stare at the
rafters----”

Fallows looked down intently at him for a moment, and said:

“John, you’ve got about all your equipment now. You can’t stand much
more tearing down. My road is not for you. You were given balance
against that. Don’t venture into what is alien ground for you. You will
get back your health. Even the wound will heal. Then will come to you
those gracious ideals of singleness, plainness of house and fare, of
purity and solitude and the integration of the greater dimension of
force.... You are through looking--you must listen now. The blessedness
you told me of this last summer was but a breath of what you will
get....

“You are a natural monk. If you were in a monastery, the laws
restraining you would be gross and material, compared with those bonds
which nature has put upon you. The cowl, the cell, and the solitude
are but symbols again of the inner monasticism a few rare souls have
known. You need no exterior bonds, vows, nor threatenings--no walls,
no brandishing threats of damnation. But, if you should betray the
invisible restraints that have held you for so many years, the sin
would be far deadlier than breaking any vows made to a church or to an
order. Vows are for half-men, John; vows are but the crutches of an
unfinished integrity.”


                                  11

ON the morning of the Third, at ten, her call came to him.
Shortly after twelve he was across the river and far uptown in
the hallway of an apartment-house. Even as he spoke her name, his
was called from the head of the stairs. He always remembered the
intonation.... A fire was burning in the grate. The ’cello was there.
She left the hall-door of the room open, but they heard voices, and it
was draughty.... She went to close it and returned to Morning, who was
still standing.

“What is the matter? You are not well,” she said.... It was hard for
him to realize that this was only the third time he had seen her. He
was trying to adjust her in the other meetings with this--the angel who
had come helping to the Armory; the concert Betty Berry, her nature
flung wide to expression, bringing her gift with love to her people.
The Armory was one; but the Betty Berry of the concert-night was many:
she who had come forth from the stage to his arms (and that was the
kiss of all time); the listening Betty Berry in the dimness of the
Pullman car; holding fast to his hand as a child might, while they
watched the dawn of morning together; the Betty Berry who had led him
to her berth on the ship--that kiss and this....

The room had disordered him at the first moment. It was so particularly
a New York apartment room. But the ’cello helped it; the grate-fire
was good, and after she had shut the door--there was something eternal
about the sweetness of that--it was quite the place for them to be.

He was animate with emotions--and yet they were defined, sharp, of
their own natures, no soft overflow of sentiment, each with a fineness
of its own, like breaths of forest and sea and meadow lands. These
were great things which came to him; but they were not passions.... He
saw her with fear, too. Simply being here, had the impressiveness of a
miracle. It was less that he did not deserve to be with her, than that
the world he knew was hardly the place for such blessedness. He was
listening to her, in gladness and humility:

“... I asked myself again and again after you were gone, ‘Is it a
dream?’ ... I moved about the decks waiting for the night, as one in a
deep dream.... You were gone so quickly after that voice. Oh, I was all
right. I was full of you. It would have seemed sacrilege to ask for you
again.... Yet I seemed to expect you with every knock or step or bell.
They asked me to play on shipboard, and I could hardly believe you were
not among those who listened.... That first night at sea, the moon was
under a hazy mass. I don’t know why I speak of it, but I remember how I
stood watching it--perhaps hours--and out of it all I only realized at
last that my hands were so small for the things I wanted to do for you,
and for everybody.”

That was the quality of her--as if between every sentence, hours of
exterior influences had intervened.... He began to realize that Betty
Berry never explained. All that afternoon, in different ways, his
comprehension augmented on how fine a thing this is. She was glad
always to abide by what she said or did. Even on that night, when she
came from her playing to the wings where he stood, came to his arms,
while the people praised her--she never made light of that acceptance.
Many would have diminished it, by saying that they were not accountable
in the excitement and enthusiasm of a sympathetic audience. It was
so to-day when the door was closed. It seemed to Morning as if human
adults should be as fine as this--above all guile and fear.

He was in a risen world that afternoon. Often he wished he could make
the world see her as he did. But that was the literary habit, and a
tribute to her. Certainly it was not for the writing. He was clay
beside her, but happy to be clay.... She did not know it, he thought,
but she was free.

That was his thought of the day. Betty Berry was free. The door of the
cage was open for her. She did not have to stay, but she did stay for
love of the weaker-winged.

“Will all our meetings be so different and lovely?” she asked in the
early dusk. “Please tell me about yourself very long ago--the little
boy, before he went away.”

It was queer for her to ask that. He had expected her to inquire at
once about the three months since their parting in Baltimore. He had
determined to tell if she asked, but it was hard even to think of his
descents, with her sitting by the fire so near. Such things seemed
to have nothing to do with him now--especially when he was with her.
They were like old and vile garments cast off; and without relation to
him, unless he went back and put them on again. Little matters like
Charley and his sister had a relation, for they were without taint.
His thoughts to-day were thoughts of doing well for men, as in fine
moments with Duke Fallows--of going out _with her_ into the world
to help--of writing and giving, of laughing and lifting.... It was
surprising how he remembered the very long ago days--the silent, solid,
steadily-resisting little chap. Many things came back, and with a
clearness that he had not known for years. The very palms of her hands
were upturned in her listening; it seemed as if the valves of her heart
must be open.

“I can see him--the dear little boy----”

He laughed at her tenderness.... They went out late to dinner; and by
the time he had walked back to the house it was necessary for him to
leave, if he caught the last car to Hackensack. Duke Fallows would be
expecting him at the cabin....

It came to him suddenly, and with a new force, on the ferry, that he
had once wished she were pretty. He suffered for it again. He could
never recall her face exactly. She came to him in countless ways--with
poise for his restlessness, with faith and stamina that made all his
former endurings common--but never in fixed feature. It was the same
with her sayings. He remembered the spirit and the lustre of them, but
never the words.... She was a saint moving unobserved about the world,
playing--adrift on the world, and so pure.

He realized also that he had spoken of Betty Berry for the last
time to Duke Fallows. There was no doubt in his mind now that
Fallows had replaced his old weakness with what might be called, in
kindness--fanaticism.... The thought was unspeakable that Betty Berry
could spoil his work in the world--he, John Morning, a living hatch of
scars from his errors ... and so arrogant and imperious he had been in
evil-doing! This trend made him think of her first words to-day: “You
are not well.” It was true that he had been astonished often of late by
a series of physical disturbances, so much so that he had begun to ask
himself, in his detached fashion, what would come next. He could not
accept Fallows’ promise that he would get altogether right in health
again. He was certainly not so good as he had been. These things made
him ashamed.

Now that he was away from her, the sense obtained that he had not been
square in withholding the facts of the wastrel period. It didn’t seem
quite the same now, as when she was sitting opposite. He would have to
tell her some time, and of that certain mental treachery to her, and of
the wound, too.... He saw the light of the hill cabin. A touch of the
old irritation of Liaoyang had recurred of late. Morning could master
it better now. Still so many things that Fallows had said in Asia had
come true. Climbing up the hill, he laughed uneasily at the idea of
his being temperamentally a monk.... He had not strayed much among
women; he had been too busy. Now he had met his own. He would go to
her to-morrow. His love for her was the one right thing in the world.
Fallows nor the world could alter that....

The resistance which these thoughts had built in his mind was all
smoothed away by the spontaneous affection of the greeting. They sat
down together before the fire, but neither spoke of the woman who had
come between.


                                  12

ON the way to Betty Berry the second day, Morning could not
quite hold the altitude of yesterday. There was much of the boy left
in the manner of his love for her. The woman that the world saw, and
which he saw with physical eyes, was only one of her mysteries. The
important thing was that he saw her really, and as she was not seen by
another.... They had been together an hour when this was said:

“There comes a time--a certain day--when a little girl realizes what
beauty is, and something of what it means in the world. That day came
to me and it was hard. I fought it out all at once. I was not exactly
sure what I wanted, but I knew that beauty could never help me in any
way. I learned to play better when I realized this fully. I have said
to myself a million times, ‘Expect nothing. No one will love you.
You must do without that,’ I believed it firmly.... So you see when
I went back to the Armory that next morning I had something to fall
back upon.... I would not have thought about it except you made me
forget--that afternoon. Why, I forget it now when you come; but when
you go, I force myself to remember----”

“Why do you do that?”

She was looking into the fire. The day was stormy, and they were glad
to be kept in.

“Why do you do that?” he repeated.

“Because I can’t feel quite at rest about our being together always. It
seems too wonderful. You must understand--it’s only because it is so
dear a thing----”

She had spoken hastily, seeing the fear and rebellion in his eyes.

“Betty Berry.... We’re not afraid of being poor. Why not go out and get
married to-day--now?”

Her hand went out to him.

“That wouldn’t be fine in us,” she said intensely. “I would feel that
we couldn’t be trusted--if we did anything like that.... Oh, that
would never keep us together--_that_ is not the great thing. And
to-day--what a gray day and bleak. We shall know if that day comes.
It will be one such as the butterfly chooses for her emerging. It
must not be planned. Such a day comes of itself.... Why, it would be
like seizing something precious from another’s hand--before it is
offered----”

“And you think you are not beautiful?” he said.

“Yes.”

He tried to tell her how she seemed to him when they were apart--how
differently and perfectly the phases of her came.

“It makes me silent,” he went on. “I try to tell just where it is. And
sometimes when I am away--I wonder what is so changed and cleansed and
buoyant in my heart--and then I know it is you--sustaining.”

“It doesn’t seem to belong to me--what you say,” she answered. “I don’t
dare to think of it as mine.... Please don’t think of me as above other
women. I am not apart nor above. I am just Betty Berry, who comes and
goes and plays--dull in so many ways--as yet, a little afraid to be
happy. When you tempt me as now to be happy--it seems I must go and
find someone very miserable and do something perfect for him.... But,
it is true, I fear nothing so much as that you should believe me more
than I am.”

A little afterward she was saying in her queer, unjointed way, as if
she spoke only here and there a sentence from the thoughts running
swiftly through her mind:

“... And once, (it was only a few weeks after the Armory, and I was
playing eastward) I heard your name mentioned among some musicians.
They had been talking about your war, and they had seen the great
story.... I couldn’t tell them that I know you?... It was known you
were in New York, and one of the musicians spoke of an early Broadway
engagement--of starting for New York that very night. It was the most
common thing to say--but I went to my room and cried. Going to New
York--where you were. Can you understand--that it didn’t seem right
for him, just to take a train like that? And I had to go eastward
so slowly. For a while after that, traveling out there, I couldn’t
hold you so clearly; but as we neared New York--whether I wished it
or not--I began to feel you again, to expect you at every turning.
Sometimes as I played--it was uncanny, the sense that came to me, that
you were in the audience, and that we were working together.... And
then you came.”

Her picture changed now. Morning grew restless. It was almost as if
there were a suggestion from Duke Fallows in her sentences:

“I thought of you always as alone.... You have gone so many ways alone.
Perhaps the thought came from your work. I never could read the places
where you suffered so--but I mean from the tone and theme of it. You
were down among the terrors and miseries--but always alone.... You
will go back to them--alone, but carrying calmness and cheer. You will
be different.... It’s hard for me to say, but if we should clutch at
something for ourselves--greedily because we want something now--and
you should not be able to do your work so well because of me--I
think--I think I should never cease to suffer.”

A dozen things to say had risen with hostility in his mind to check
this faltering expression, the purport of which he knew so well in its
every aspect. He hated the thought of others seeing his future and
not considering him. He hated the fear that came to him. There had
been fruits to all that Fallows had said before. He had plucked them
afterward. And now Betty Berry was one with Fallows in this hideous and
solitary conception of him. And there she sat, lovely and actual--the
very essence of all the good that he might do. He was so tired of what
she meant; and it was all so huge and unbreakable, that he grew calm
before he spoke, from the very inexorability of it.

“There is no place for me to go--that you could not go with me. Every
one seems to see great service for me, but I see it with you. Surely we
could go together to people who suffer.... I have been much alone, but
I spent most of the time serving myself. I have slaved for myself. If
Duke Fallows had left me alone, I should have been greedy and ambitious
and common. I see you now identified with all the good of the future.
You came bringing the good with you to the Armory that day, but I was
so clouded with hatred and self-serving, that I really didn’t know it
until afterward.... All the dreams of being real and fine, of doing
good in work, and with hands and thoughts, of sometime really being
a good man who knows no happiness but service for others--that means
you--you! You must come with me. We will be good together. We will
serve together. Everybody will be better for us. We will do it because
we love so much--and can’t help it----”

“Oh, don’t say any more--please--please! It is too much for me. Go
away--won’t you?”

She had risen and clung to him, her face imploring.

“Do you really want me to go away?” he said.

“Yes--I have prayed for one to come saying such things--of two going
forth to help--prayed without faith.... I cannot bear another word to
be said to-day.... I want to sit here and live with it----”

He was bewildered. He bent to kiss her brow--but refrained.... Her face
shone; her eyes were filled with tears.... He was in the street trying
to recall what he had said.


                                  13

HE did not cross the river, but wandered about the city....
She had starved her heart always, put away the idea of a lover, and
sought to carry out her dreams of service alone. Then he had come. In
the midst of mental tossing and disorder to-day, he had stumbled upon
an expression of her highest idea of earth-life: for man and woman to
serve together--God loving the world through their everyday lives....
And she had been unable to bear him longer near her. It was the same
with her heart, as with one who has starved the body, and must begin
with morsels.

He was in the hotel writing-room--filling pages to her. He did not mean
to send the pages. It was to pass the time until evening. He lacked
even the beginnings of strength to stay away from her until to-morrow.
He would have telephoned, but she had not given him the number, or the
name of the woman who kept the house. The writing held his thoughts
from the momentarily recurring impulse to go back. The city was just a
vibration. Moments of the writing brought her magically near. In spite
of her prayer for him not to, his whole nature idealized her now. His
mind was swept again and again with gusts of her attraction. Thoughts
of hers came to him almost stinging with reality ... and to see her
again--to see her again. Once in the intensity of his outpouring, he
halted as if she had called--as if she had called to him to come up to
her out of the hollows and the vagueness of light.

It was nightfall. He gave way suddenly--to that double-crossing of
temptation which forces upon the tempted one the conviction that what
he desires is the right thing.... He would be a fool not to go. She
would expect him.... He arose and set out for her house.

But as he neared the corner something within felt itself betrayed.

“And so I cannot be content with her happiness,” he thought. “I cannot
be content with the little mysteries that make her the _one_ Betty
Berry. I am not brave enough to be happy alone--as she is. I must have
the woman....”

He was hot with the shame of it. He saw her bountifulness; her capacity
to wait. Clearly he saw that all these complications and conflicts of
his own mind were not indications of a large nature, but the failures
of one unfinished. She did not torture herself with thoughts; she
obeyed a heart unerringly true and real. She shone as never before;
fearless, yet with splendid zeal for giving; free to the sky, yet eager
to linger low and tenderly where her heart was in harmony; a stranger
to all, save one or two in the world, pitilessly hungry to be known,
and yet asking so little.... Compared with her, he saw himself as a
littered house, wind blowing through broken windows.

... That night, sitting with Duke Fallows before the fire, brooding
on his own furious desires, he thought of the other John Morning who
had brooded over the story of Liaoyang in so many rooms with the
same companion. All that former brooding had only forced the world
to a show-down. He knew, forever, how pitifully little the world can
give.... A cabin on the hill and a name that meant a call in the next
war....

The face of the other cooled and stilled him. Duke was troubled; Duke,
who wasn’t afraid of kings or armies or anything that the world might
do; who didn’t seem even afraid now of the old Eve violence, whoever
she was--was afraid to speak of Betty Berry to his best friend....
Morning wondered at this. Had Duke given up--or was he afraid of mixing
things more if he expressed himself? The fire-lit face was tense.
One after another of the man’s splendid moments and performances ran
through Morning’s mind--the enveloping compassion--in Tokyo, Liaoyang,
in the grain, in the ploughed lands--the Lowenkampf friend, the friend
of the peasant house, the friend of men in Metal Workers’ Hall, his
own friend in a score of places and ways--the man’s consummate art in
friendliness....

“Duke, there’s a lot to think about in just plain living, isn’t there?”

The other started. “Hello,” he said. “I didn’t think you were in my
world.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Betty Berry was waiting at the stairs the next morning.

“Did you get my letter?” she whispered, when the door had swung to.

“No.... Mailed last night?”

“Yes.”

“I left the cabin two hours before the mail. It’s rural delivery, you
know. Jethro reaches my box late in the forenoon----”

“I wrote it about dark, but didn’t mail it until later. I thought you
would come----”

He told her how he had written, how he had come to her house, and
turned away. They were very happy.

“To think that you came so far. I couldn’t sit still, I was so
expectant at that very time.... But it was good for us----”

“I understood after a while.”

“Of course, you understood.... I was--oh, so happy yesterday. Yet,
aren’t we strange? Before it was night, I wanted you to come back....
I didn’t go out last night. I couldn’t practice. To-night, there are
some friends whom I must see----”

Morning, in a troubled way, reckoned the hours until evening.... She
was here and there about the room. The place already reflected her. She
had never been so blithe before.... It was an hour afterward that he
picked up a little tuning-fork from the dresser, and twanged it with
his nail. She started and turned to him, her thumb pressed against her
lips--her whole attitude that of a frightened child.

“I wonder if I could tell you?” she said hesitatingly. “It would
make many things clear. You told me about little boy--you. It was my
father’s----”

He waited without speaking.

“... He used to lead the singing in a city church,” she said. “Always
he carried the tuning-fork. He would twang it upon a cup or a piece
of wood, and put it to his ear--taking the tone. He had a soft tenor
voice. There was never another just like it, and always he was
humming.... I remember his lips moving through the long sermons, as he
conned the hymn-book, one song after another, tapping his fork upon
a signet ring. How I remember the tiny twanging, the light hum of an
insect that came from him, from song to song, his finger keeping time,
his lips pursed over the words.

“He never heard the preacher. There was no organ allowed, but he led
the hymns. He loved it. He held the time and tone for the people--but
never sang a hymn twice the same, bringing in the strangest variations,
but always true, his face flaming with pleasure.

“For years and years we lived alone. As a little girl, I was lifted to
the stool to play his accompaniments. As a young woman, I supported
him, giving music lessons. The neighbors thought him an invalid.... All
his viciousness was secret from the world, but common property between
us from my babyhood. I pitied him and covered him, fed him when he
might have fed himself, waited upon him when he might have helped me.
He would hold my mind with little devilish things and thoughts--as
natural to him as the tuning-fork.... He would despoil the little stock
of food while I was away, and nail the windows down. My whole life, I
marveled at the ingenuity of his lies. He was so little and helpless. I
never expected to be treated as a decent creature, from those who had
heard his tales. They looked askance at me.

“For years, he told me that he was dying, and I sat with him in the
nights, or played or read aloud. If any one came, he lay white and
peaceful, with a look of martyrdom.... And then at the last, I fell
asleep beside him. It was late, but the lamp was burning. I felt him
touch me before morning--the little old white thing, his lips pursed.
The tuning-fork dropped with a twang to the floor. I could not believe
I was free--but cried and cried. At the funeral, when the church people
spoke of ‘our pain-racked and martyred brother’----”

She did not finish.

Morning left her side. “I never thought of a little girl that way,” he
said, standing apart. “Why, you have given me the spirit of her, Betty.
It is what you have passed through that has made you perfect.... And I
was fighting for myself, and for silly things all the time----”

But he had not expressed what was really in his mind--of the beauty and
tenderness of unknown women everywhere, in whose hearts the sufferings
of others find arable ground. Surely, these women are the grace of the
world. His mother must have been weathered by such perfect refinements,
otherwise he would not have been able to appreciate it in Betty Berry.
It was all too dreamy to put into words yet, but he felt it very
important in his life--this that had come to him from Betty’s story,
and from Betty standing there--woman’s power, her bounty, her mystic
valor, all from the unconscious high behavior of a child.

She had given him something that the _Ploughman_ gave Duke
Fallows. He wanted to make the child live in the world’s thoughts, as
Duke was making the _Ploughman_ live.

It was these things--common, beautiful, passed-by things, that revealed
to Morning, as he began to be ready--the white flood of spirit that
drives the world, that is pressing always against hearts that are pure.

He went nearer to her.

“Everything I think is love for you, Betty,” he said.

The air was light about her, and delicate as from woodlands.


                                  14

THE horse and phaeton--both very old--of the rural-carrier could
be seen from the hill-cabin. Duke Fallows walked down to the fence
to say “Hello” to Jethro whom he admired. He returned bearing very
thoughtfully a letter addressed to John Morning. It was from across the
river; the name, street, and number of the sender were written upon the
envelope.... Fallows sat down before the fire again, staring at the
letter. He thought of the woman who had written this, (just the few
little things that Morning had said) and then he thought of the gaunt
peasant woman in Russia, the mate of the _Ploughman_, and of the
mother of the _Ploughman_. He thought of the little boy, Jan--the
one little boy of the six, that had his heart, and whom he longed for.

He thought of this little boy on one hand--and the world on the other.

Then he thought of Morning again, and of the woman.

He loved the world; he loved the little boy. Sometimes it seemed to
him when he was very happy--that he loved the world and the little boy
with almost the same compassion--the weakness, fineness, and innocence
of the races of men seeming almost like the child’s.

He thought of John Morning differently. He had loved him at first,
because he was down and fighting grimly. He thought of him of late as
an instrument, upon which might be played a message of mercy and power
to all who suffered--to the world and to the little boy alike.

And now Fallows was afraid for the instrument. Many things had maimed
it, but this is the way of men; and these maimings had left their
revelations from the depths. Such may measure into the equipment of
a big man, destined to meet the many face to face. Fallows saw this
instrument in danger of being taken over by a woman--to be played upon
by colorful and earthly seductions. No man could grant more readily
than he, that such interpretations are good for most men; that the
highest harmony of the average man is the expression of love for his
one woman and his children. But to John Morning, Fallows believed such
felicity would close for life the great work which he had visioned from
the beginning.

He did not want lyrical singing from John Morning, he wanted prophetic
thunderings.

He wanted this maimed young man to rise up from the dregs and tell his
story and the large meaning of it. He wanted him to burn with a white
light before the world. He wanted the Koupangtse courage to drive into
the hearts of men; a pure reformative spirit to leap forth from the
capaciousness where ambition had been; he wanted John Morning to ignite
alone. He believed the cabin in which he now sat was built blindly from
the boy’s standpoint, but intelligently from the spirit of the boy,
to become the place of ignition. He believed this of Morning’s to be
a celibate spirit that could be finally maimed only by a woman. He
believed that Morning was perfecting a marvelous instrument, one that
would alter all society for the better, if he gave his heart to the
world.

Fallows even asked himself if he did not have his own desperate
pursuits among women in too close consideration.... It would be easy
to withdraw. So often he had faltered before the harder way, and found
afterward that the easy one was evil.... He left it this way: If he
could gain audience with Betty Berry alone this evening he would speak;
if Morning were with her, he would find an excuse for joining them and
quickly depart. Last night Morning had returned to the cabin early;
the night before by the last car. It was less than an even chance....
Fallows crossed the river, thinking, if the woman were common it
would be easy. The way it turned out left no doubt as to what he must
do. Approaching the number, on the street named on the corner of the
envelope, he passed John Morning, head down in contemplation. He was
admitted to the house. Betty Berry appeared, led him to a small upper
parlor, and excused herself for a moment.

Fallows sat back and closed his eyes. He was suffering. All his fancied
hostility was gone. He saw a woman very real, and to him magical; he
saw that this was bloody business.... She came back, the full terror of
him in her eyes. She did not need to be so sensitive to know that he
had not come as a cup-bearer.... He was saying to himself, “I will not
struggle with her....”

“Have I time to tell my story?”

“I was going out.... John Morning just went away because I was to meet
old friends. But, if this is so very important, of course----”

“It is about him.”

“I think you must tell your story.”

Fallows talked of Morning’s work, of what he had first seen from
Luzon, and of the man he found in Tokyo. He spoke of the days and
nights in Liaoyang, as he had watched Morning at his work.

“He’s at his best at the type-writer. When the work is really coming
right for him, he seems to be used by a larger, finer force than he
shows at other times.... It is good to talk to you, Miss Berry. You are
a real listener. You seem to know what I am to say next----”

“Go on,” she said.

“When a man with a developed power of expression stops writing what
the world is saying, and learns to listen to that larger, finer force
within him--indeed, when he has a natural genius for such listening,
and cultivates a better receptivity, always a finer and more sensitive
surface for its messages--such a man becomes in time the medium between
man and the energy that drives the world----”

“Yes----”

“Some call this energy that drives the world the Holy Spirit, and
some call it the Absolute. I call it love of God. A few powerful men
of every race are prepared to express it. These individuals come up
like the others through the dark, often through viler darkness. They
suffer as others cannot dream of suffering. They are put in terrible
places--each of which leaves its impress upon the instrument--the
mind. You have read part of John Morning’s story. Perhaps he has told
you other parts. His mind is furrowed and transcribed with terrible
miseries.

“Until recently his capacity was stretched by the furious passion of
ambition. It seemed in Asia as if he couldn’t die, unexpressed; as if
the world couldn’t kill him. You saw him at the Armory just after he
had passed through thirty days hard enough to slay six men. Ambition
held him up--and hate and all the powers of the ego.

“This is what I want to tell you: ‘When the love of God fills that
furious capacity which ambition has made ready; when the love of God
floods over the broadened surfaces of his mind, furrowed and sensitized
by suffering, filling the matrix which the dreadful experiences have
marked so deeply--John Morning will be a wonderful instrument of
interpretation between God and his race.’

“I can make my story very short for you, Miss Berry. Your listening
makes it clearer than ever to me. I see what men mean when they say
they can write to women. Yes, I see it.... John Morning has made ready
his cup. It will be filled with the water of life--to be carried to
men. But John Morning must feel first the torture of the thirst of men.

“Every misery he has known has brought him nearer to this realization;
days here among the dregs of the city; days of hideous light and
shadow; days on the China Sea, sitting with coolies crowded so they
could not move; days afield, and the perils; days alone in his little
cabin on the hill; sickness, failures, hatreds from men, the answering
hatred of his fleshly heart--all these have knit him with men and
brought him understanding.

“He has been down among men. Suffering has graven his mind with
the mysteries of the fallen. You must have understanding to have
compassion. In John Morning, the love of God will pass through human
deeps to men. Deep calls to deep. He will meet the lowest face to face.
He will bring to the deepest down man the only authority such a man can
recognize--that of having been there in the body. And the thrill of
rising will be told. Those who listen and read will know that he has
been there, and see that he is risen. He will tell how the water of
life came to him--and flooded over him, and healed his miseries and his
pains. The splendid shining authority of it will rise from his face and
from his book.

“And men won’t be the same after reading and listening; (nor women who
receive more quickly and passionately)--women won’t be the same. Women
will see that those who suffer most are the real elect of this world.
It’s wonderful to make women listen, Miss Berry, for their children
bring back the story.

“It isn’t that John Morning must turn to love God. I don’t mean that.
He must love men. He must receive the love of God--and give it to
men. To be able to listen and to receive with a trained instrument of
expression, and then to turn the message to the service of men--that’s
a World-Man’s work. John Morning will do it--if he loves humanity
enough. He’s the only living man I know who has a chance. He will
achieve almost perfect instrumentation. He will express what men need
most to know in terms of art and action. The love of God must have man
to manifest it, and that’s John Morning’s work--if he loves humanity
enough to make her his bride.”

Fallows was conscious now of really seeing her. She had not risen, but
seemed nearer--as if the chair, in which she slowly rocked, had crept
nearer as he talked. Her palms resting upon her knees were turned
upward toward him:

“And you think John Morning is nearly ready for that crown of
Compassion?”

“Yes----”

“You think he will receive the Compassion--and give it to men in terms
of art and action?”

“Yes----”

“You think if he loves me--if he turns his love to me, as he is
doing--he cannot receive that greater love which he must give men?”

“Yes----”

“And you think it would be a good woman’s part to turn him from her?”

“Yes----”

“And you came to tell me this?”

“Yes.”

“I think it is true----”

“Oh, listen--listen----” he cried, rising and bending over her--“a good
woman’s part--it would be that! It would be something more--something
greater than even he could ever do.... What a vision you have given me!”

She stood before him, her face half-turned to the window. Yet she
seemed everywhere in the room--her presence filling it. He could not
speak again. He turned to go. Her words reached him as he neared the
door.

“Oh, if I only had my little baby--to take away!”


                                  15

FALLOWS stood forward on the ferry that night and considered
the whole New York episode. He had done his work. He had told the
_Ploughman_ story five times. It was just the sowing. He might
possibly come back for the harvest.... He had another story to tell
now. Could he ever tell it without breaking?... He had tortured his
brain to make things clear for Morning and for men. He realized that
a man who implants a complete concept in another intelligence and
prevents it from withering until roots are formed and fruitage is
assured, performs a miracle, no less; because, if the soil were ready,
the concept would come of itself. He had driven his brain by every
torment to make words perform this miracle on a large scale.

And this little listening creature he had just left--she had taken
his idea, finished it for him, and involved it in action. To her it
was the Cross. She had carried it to Golgotha, and sunk upon it with
outstretched palms.... There was an excellence about Betty Berry that
amazed him, in that it was in the world.... He had not called such
women to him, because such women were not the answer to his desires.
He realized with shame that a man only knows the women who answer in
part the desires of his life. Those who had come to him were fitted
to the plane of sensation upon which he had lived so many years. He
had condemned all women because, in the weariness of the flesh, he had
suddenly risen to perceive the falsity of his affinities of the flesh.
“What boys we are!” he whispered, “in war and women and work--what
boys!”

Betty Berry had taught him a lesson, quite as enormous to his nature as
the _Ploughman’s_. A man who thinks of women only in sensuousness
encounters but half-women. He had learned it late, but well, that
a man in this world may rise to heights far above his fellows in
understanding, but that groups of women are waiting on all the higher
slopes of consciousness for their sons and brothers and lovers to come
up. They pass their time weaving laurel-leaves for the brows of delayed
valiants....

Duke thought of the men he had seen afield, the gravity with which
these men did their great fighting business, the world talking about
them. Then he thought of the little visionary in her room accepting her
tragedy....

Even now, in the hush and back-swing of the pendulum, it seemed very
true what he had said. She had seen it. It is dangerous business to
venture to change the current of other lives; no one knew it better
than Fallows. But he considered Morning. Morning, as it were, had been
left on his door-step. Morning would be alone now--alone to listen and
receive his powers.... Fallows looked up from the black water to the
far-apart pickets of the wintry night. He was going home.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cabin was lit. Fallows climbed the hill wearily. There was a
certain sharpness as of treachery from his night’s work, but to that
larger region of mind, open to selfishness and the passion to serve
men, peace had come. He was going home, first to San Francisco--then to
the Bosks and the little boy.

Morning arose quickly at the sound of the step on the hard ground, and
opened the door wide. He had been reading her letter, which Fallows had
left upon the table. The letter had been like an added hour with her.
It was full of shy joy, full of their perfect accord, remote from the
world--its road and stone-piles and evasions.... Fallows saw that he
looked white and wasted. The red of the firelight did not mislead his
eye. Its glow was not Morning’s and did not blend with the pallor.

“I’m going on to-morrow, John,” he said.

“’Frisco?”

“Yes--and then----”

“You’ll come back here?”

“No, I’ll keep on into the west to _my_ cabin----”

“It would be nearer this way. I planned to see you after ’Frisco.”

“I’ll come back,” Fallows’ thought repeated, “for the harvest.”

“And so you are going to make the big circle again?”

“Yes.”

“You haven’t finished this first one, until you reach Noyes and your
desk in the _Western States_.”

“The next journey won’t take so long.”

“You’ve been the good angel to me again, Duke. It’s quite a wonder, how
you turn up in disaster of mine.... I wonder if I shall ever come to
you--but you won’t get down. You wouldn’t even stay ill.”

“You won’t get down again, John, at least, in none of the ways you know
about----”

Both men seemed spent beyond words.... Morning saw in the other’s
departure the last bit of resistance lifted from his heart’s quest.
Betty Berry had come between them. Morning’s conviction had never
faltered on the point that Fallows was structurally weak on this one
matter.... And so he was going. All that was illustrious in their
friendship returned. They needed few words, but sat late before turning
in. The cabin cooled and freshened. Each had the thought, before
finally falling asleep, that they were at sea again.... And in the
morning the thing that lived from their parting was this, from Duke
Fallows:

“Whatever you do, John--don’t forget your own--the deepest down man. He
is yours--go after him--get him!”

       *       *       *       *       *

... She was at the top of the stairs when he called the next morning;
and he was only half-way up when he saw that she had on her hat and
coat and gloves. The day was bitter like the others. He had thought of
her fire, and the quiet of her presence. He meant to tell her all about
Duke Fallows and the going. It was his thought--that she might find in
this (not through words, but through his sense of release from Duke’s
antagonism) a certain quickening toward their actual life together. He
wanted to talk of bringing her to the cabin--at least, for her to come
for a day.

“You will go with me to get the tickets and things. I must start west
at once.”

It was quite dark in the upper hallway. Morning reached out and turned
her by the elbow, back toward the door of her room. There in the light,
he looked into her face. She was calm, her eyes bright. Whatever the
night had brought--if weakness it was mastered, if exaltation it was
controlled. But she was holding very hard. There was a tightness about
her mouth that terrified him. It was not as it had been with them; he
was not one with her.

“You mean that you are going away--for some time?”

“Yes.... Oh, you must not mind. We are road people. We have been
wonderfully happy. You must not look so tragic----”

It wasn’t like her at all. “We are not road people,” he thought....
“You must not look so tragic,”--that was just like a thing road people
might say.

He sat down. The weakness of his limbs held his mind. It seemed to him,
if he could forget his body, words might come. At first the thought
of her going away was intolerable, but that had dwindled. It was the
change in her--the something that had happened--the flippancy of her
words.... He looked up suddenly. It seemed as if her arms had been
stretched toward him, her face ineffably tender. So quickly it had
happened that he could not be sure. He wanted this very thing so much
that his mind might have formed the illusion. He let it pass. He did
not want her to say it was not so.

Words of her letter came back to him. Neither the letter nor yesterday
had anything to do with this day.... “You are drawing closer all the
time. I have been so happy to-day that I had to write. You must know
that I sent you away because I could not bear more happiness....”

Where was it? What had happened? He was fevered. Something was
destroying him.... Betty Berry did not suffer for herself--it was with
pity for him. The mother in her was tortured. It was her own life--this
love of his for her--the only child she would ever have. She had loved
its awakenings, its diffidences, the faltering steps of its expression.
The man was not hers, but his love for her was her very own.... She had
not thought of its death, when Fallows talked the night before. She had
thought of _her_ giving up for his sake, but not of the anguish
and the slaying of his love for her. And this was taking place now.

“You will let me write to you?” he said, still thinking of the letter.

“Oh, yes.”

“And you will write to me?”

She remembered now what she had written.... The fullness of her heart
had gone into that. She could not write like that again. Yet he was
asking for her letters, as a child might ask for a drink.... She could
not refuse. It wasn’t in nature to see his face, and refuse.... Surely
if she remained apart it was all any one could ask.

“Yes, I will write sometimes.”

He stood in the center of the room, his head bowed slightly, his eyes
upon the wall. He was ill, bewildered, his mind turning here and there
only to find fresh distress.... Suddenly he remembered that he had not
told her of his drinking.... That must be it. Some one else had told
her, and she was hurt and broken.

“I meant always to tell you,” he said. “Only it really did not seem
to signify by the time you came back. And when I was with you--oh, I
seemed very far from that. I don’t understand it now----”

She did not know what he meant; did not care, could not ask. It was
something he clutched--in the disintegration.... He looked less
death-like in his thinking of it.

“It doesn’t greatly matter,” she said. “I have to go west.... Won’t you
come with me to get the tickets?”

“I can’t go out into the street yet. If there is anything more I have
done--won’t you let me know?”

Suddenly he realized her side, that he was detaining her; that it
wasn’t easy for her to speak. It was not his way to impose his will
upon anyone; his natural shyness now arose, and he fingered his hat.

“Dear John Morning--you haven’t done anything. You have made me happy.
I must go away to my work--and you, to yours.... It is hard for me,
but I see it as the way. I have promised to write----”

The words came forth like birds escaping--thin, evasive, vain words.
That which she had seen so clearly the night before, (and which she
seemed utterly to have lost the meaning of) was a lock upon every real
utterance now. She had not counted upon this tragedy of her mother
instinct--this slaying of the perfect thing in him, which she had loved
to life.

He arose, and sat down; he swallowed, started to speak, but could not.
He was like a boy--this man who had seen so much, just a bewildered
boy, his suffering too deep for words--the sweetest part of him to
her, dying before her eyes. And the dream of their service together,
their hand-in-hand going out to the world, their poverty and purity and
compassion together--these were lost jewels.... It was all madness,
the world--all madness and devilishness. Beauty and virtue and loving
kindness were gone, the world turned insane.... The thought came to
tell _him_ she was insane; a better lie still, that she was not
a pure woman. She started to speak, but his eyes came up to her....
She tried it again, but his eyes came up to her. He fingered his hat
boyishly. The mother in her breast could not.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their dreadful night. The winter darkness was coming on swiftly. Her
train was leaving.

“But you said you were not going to work for the present. You have been
working so hard all winter----”

He had said it all before.

“Yes--but there is much for me to do--days of study and practice--and
thinking. You will understand.... Everything will come clear and you
will understand. You see, to-day--this isn’t a day for words with
us.... One must have one’s own secret place. You must say of me, ‘She
suddenly remembered something--and had to go away.’...”

“‘She suddenly remembered something and had to hurry away,’” he
repeated, trying to smile. “But she will write to me. I will
work--work--and when you let me, I will come to you----”

“Yes----”

He had to leave.... He kissed her again. There was something like death
about it.

“If we _were_ only dead,” she said, “and were going away
together----”

       *       *       *       *       *

... A man stepped up to him, regarded him intently. Morning realized
that he must get alone. He had been shaking his head wearily,
and unseeingly--standing in the main corridor of the station in
Jersey--shaking his head.... It was full night outside. He forgot that
he did not have to recross the river--and was on the ferry back to New
York before he remembered....

He gained the hill to his cabin long afterward. That reminded him that
Duke Fallows had gone, too--and that very morning.

It seemed farther back in his life than Liaoyang.


                                  16

BETTY BERRY’S journey was ten hours west by the limited
trains--straight to the heart of her one tried friend, Helen Quiston, a
city music teacher. Her first thought, and the one buoy, was that she
would be able to tell everything.... She could not make Helen Quiston
feel the pressure that his Guardian Spirit (she always thought of Duke
Fallows so) invoked in that half-hour of his call, but with a day or a
night she could make her friend know what had happened, and something
of the extent of force which had led to her sacrifice. Helen would tell
her if she were mad. All through that night she prayed that her friend
would call her mad--would force her to see that the thing she had done
was viciously insane.

She was engulfed. For the first time, her spirit failed to right itself
in any way. She was more dependent upon Helen Quiston than she had
conceived possible, since the little girl had fought out the different
cruel presentations of the days, during the early life with her father.

Throughout the night _en route_ she thought of the letter she had
promised to write to John Morning. The day with him had brought the
letter from a vague promise to an immediate duty upon her reaching
the studio.... She was to write first, and at once. Already she was
making trials in her mind, but none would do. He would penetrate
every affectation. The wonder and dreadfulness of it--was that she
must not tell the truth, for he would be upon her, furiously human,
disavowing all separateness from the race, as one with a message must
be; disavowing the last vestige of the dream of compassion which his
Guardian Spirit had pictured.... She knew his love for her. She had
seen it suffer. Would Helen Quiston show her that she must bring it
back--that the Guardian Spirit was evil? There was a fixture about it,
a whispering of the negative deep within.

She could not write of the memories. Not the least linger of perfume
from that night at the theatre must touch her communication. Yet it
was the arch of all. As she knew her soul and his, they had been as
pure as children that night--even before a word was spoken. It had been
so natural--such a rest and joy.... She had learned well to put love
away, before he came. From the few who approached, she had laughed
and withdrawn. The world had daubed them. In her heart toward other
men, she was as a consecrated nun. And this was like her Lord who had
come.... She had made her way in the world among men. She knew them,
worked among them, pitied them. Her father had been as weak, as evil,
as passionate, as pitiable. In the beginning she had learned the world
through him--all its bitter, brutal lessons. As she knew the ’cello and
its literature, she knew the world and the cheap artifices it would
call arts.... She had even put away judgments; she had covered her
eyes; accustomed her ears to patterings; made her essential happiness
of little things; she had labored truly, and lived on, wondering why.
And he had come at last with understanding. She had seen in Morning
potentially all that a woman loves, and cannot be. He had made her mind
and heart fruitful and flourishing again. Then his Guardian Spirit had
appeared and spoken. As of old there had been talk of a serpent. As of
old the serpent was of woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Helen Quiston was just leaving for a forenoon’s work away from the
studio. She sat down for a moment holding the other in her arms; then
she made tea and toast, and hastened off to return as quickly as
possible.... For a long time Betty Berry stood by the piano. The day
was gray and cold, but the studio was softly shining. All the woods
of it were dark, approximately the black of the grand piano; floors
and walls and picture frames were dark, but the openings were broad,
and naked trees stirred outside the back windows.... She did not look
the illness that was upon her. She was a veteran in suffering.... She
forgot to breathe, until the need of air suddenly caught and shook
her throat. It was often so when the hidden beauty of certain music
unfolded to her for the first time.

She went to the rear windows, gradually realizing that it would soon
be spring-time. There was a swift, tangible hurt in this that brought
tears. There had been no tears for the inner desolation.... “Poor dear
John Morning,” she whispered.

The reproduction of a wonderful painting of the meeting of Beatrice and
Dante held her eye for a long time.... The blight was upon her as she
tried a last time to write. It spread over her hand and the table, the
room, the day. There was a hurt for him in everything she wanted to
say. She was hot and ill--her back, her brain, her eyes, from trying.
She could not hurt him any more. He had done nothing but give her
healing and visions. His Guardian had done nothing but tell the truth,
which she had seen at the time. This agony of hers had existed. It was
like everything else in the world.

She wrote at last of their service in the world. They needed, she
said, the strong air of solitude to think out the perfect way. It was
very hard for her, who had fared so long on dreams and denials and
loneliness. He must remember that. “Great things come to those who
love at a distance,” she wrote bravely. Tears started when she saw
the sentence standing so dauntlessly upon the page of her torture....
It would make them kinder, make their ideals live--and how young they
were!... She said that she was afraid to be so happy as he had made her
in certain moments. Often she found herself staring at the picture of
Beatrice and Dante.

The thought that broke in upon this brave writing was that she was
denied the thrill of great doing, as it had come to her while Fallows
had spoken.... It would have lived on, had she gone that night, without
seeing Morning again. Moreover, her way was different from that which
she had pictured, as his Guardian talked. She did not see then that her
action made a kind of lie of all her giving up to that hour; and that
there could be no united sacrifice. It was pure, voiceless sacrifice
for her--and blind murdering for him....

From the choke of this, her mind would turn to the song of triumph her
spirit had sung as his Guardian told the story.... She had seemed to
live in a vast eternal life, as she listened; and this which she was
asked to do--was just to attend a temporary flesh sickness. She had the
strange blessedness that comes with the conviction that immortality is
here and now, as those few men and women of the world have known in
their highest moments.

She could get back nothing of that exaltation. It would never come
again. The spirit it had played upon was broken.... She had been
rushing away on her thoughts. It was afternoon, the letter unfinished,
the ’cello staring at her from the corner. It had stood by her in
all her sorrows of the years, but was empty as a fugue now--endless
variations upon the one theme of misery.... Happiness does not come
back to the little things--after one has once known the breath of
life.... She closed the narrow way of the letter, which she had filled
with words--no past nor future, only the darkness that had come in to
mingle with the dark hangings of the room of her friend.... She kissed
the pages and sent them back the way she had come in the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The qualities that had brought her the friend, Helen Quiston, and which
had made the friendship so real, were the qualities of Betty Berry.
She had come to the last woman to be told of her madness, or to find
admonition toward breaking down the thing she had begun.... They had
talked for hours that night.

“I know it is lovely, dear Betty. Why, you look lovelier this instant
than I ever dreamed you could be. Loving a man seems to do that to
a woman--but the privilege of the greater thing! Oh, you _are_
privileged. That’s the way of the great love. I should like sometime
to know that Guardian. How did mere man grasp the beauty and mystery of
service like that?... Stay with me. I will serve you, hands and feet.
It is enough for me to touch the garment’s hem.... You are already
gone from us, dearest. You have loved a man. You do love a man. He is
worthy. You have not found him wanting. What matters getting him--when
you have found your faith? Think of us--think of the gray sisterhood
you once belonged to--nuns of the world--who go about their work
helping, and who say softly to each other as they pass, ‘No, I have not
been able to find him yet.’”


                                  17

MORNING awoke in the gray of the winter morning. The place was
cold and impure. He had fallen asleep without the accustomed blasts of
hill-sweeping wind from window to window. He had not started the fire
the night before; had merely dropped upon his cot, dazed with suffering
and not knowing his weariness. He was reminded of places he had
awakened in other times when he could not remember how he got to bed.
Beyond the chairs and table lay the open fire-place, the ashes hooded
in white.

The blackness of yesterday returned, but with a hot resentment against
himself that he had not known before. He had followed Betty Berry about
for hours, and had not penetrated the hollow darkness with a single
ray of intelligence. This dreadful business was his, yet he had been
stricken; had scarcely found his speech. There was no doubt of Betty
Berry now, though a dozen evasions of hers during the day returned.
She was doing something hard, but something she thought best to do.
The real truth, however, was rightly his property.... To-day she would
write. To-morrow her letter would come. If it did not contain some
reality upon which he might stand through the present desolation, he
would go to her.... Yes, he would go to her.

His side was hurting. He was used to that; it had no new relation now.
Everything was flat and wretched. Distaste for himself and this nest
in which he had lain, was but another of the miserable adjuncts of the
morning. He stood forth shivering from the cot; struck a match and held
it to some waste paper. Kindling was ready in the fire-place, but the
paper flared out and fell to ashes, as he watched his left hand. He
went to the window and examined his hand closer. The nails were broken
and dry; there were whitish spots on the joints. He had seen something
of this before, but his physical reactions had been so various and
peculiar, in the past six weeks, that he had refused to be disturbed.

Just now his mind was clamoring with memories. He had the sense that
as soon as an opening was forced in his mind, a torrent would rush in.
He felt his heart striking hard and with rapidity. The floor heaved
windily, or was it the lightness of his limbs? He went about the things
to do with strange zeal, as if to keep his brain from a contemplation
so hideous that it could not be borne.

He lit another paper, placed kindling upon it, poked the charred stubs
of wood free from the thick covering of white, and brought fresh fuel.
Then, as the fire kindled, he opened the door and windows, and swept
and swept.... But it encroached upon him.... The open wound was no
longer a mystery.... His dream of the river and the boat that was not
allowed to land; his dream of the cliff, and looking down into the life
of earth through the tree-tops ... the ferry-man of the Hun ... and now
yesterday with its two relations to the old cause.

His whole nature was prepared for the revelation; yet it seemed to
require years in coming. Like the loss of the manuscript in the Liao
ravine, it was done before he knew.

“Of course, they had to rush away, when they found out,” he mumbled.
“Of course, they couldn’t stay. Of course, they couldn’t be the ones to
tell me.”

It might have been anywhere in China; the ferryman on the Hun ...
during the deck-passage.... It did not greatly matter. Some contact of
the Orient had started the slow virus on its long course in his veins.
He knew that it required from three to five years to reach the stage of
revealing itself as now. He saw it as the source of his various recent
indispositions, and realized that he could not remain in his cabin
indefinitely. It would be well for a while. Neither Duke Fallows nor
Betty Berry would tell. He could keep his secret, and then--to die in
some island quarantine? None of that. This was his life. He was master
of it. He should die when he pleased, and where.

... Yes, she had her gloves on, when he came. She had not removed them
all day, not even at the very last.... How strange and frightened she
had been--how pitiful and hard for her! She could not have told him.
She had loved him--and had suddenly learned.... She had seen that he
did not know.... It must have come to her in the night--after the last
day of happiness. Perhaps the processes of its coming to her were like
his. He was sorry for Betty Berry.

And he could not see her again; he could not see her again. He passed
the rest of the day with this repetition.... His life was over. That’s
what it amounted to. Of course, he would not let them segregate him.
His cabin would do for a while, until the secret threatened to reveal
itself, and then he would finish the business.... The two great issues
leaned on each other: The discovery of his mortal taint took the stress
from the tragedy of yesterday; and that he could not see Betty Berry
again kept madness away from the abominable death.... The worst of it
all was that the love-mating was ended. This brought him to the end of
the first day, when he began to think of the Play.

The literary instinct, of almost equal disorder with dramatic instinct,
and which he had come to despise during the past year, returned with
the easy conformity of an undesirable acquaintance--that reportorial
sentence-making faculty, strong as death, and as uncentering to
the soul of man. Morning saw himself searching libraries for data
on leprosy, being caught by officials--the subject of nation-wide
newspaper articles and magazine specials, the pathos of his case
variously appearing--Liaoyang recalled--his own story--Reever Kennard
relating afresh the story of the stealing of _Mio Amigo_. What
a back-wash from days of commonness! The ego and the public eye--two
Dromios--equal in monkey-mindedness and rapacity.

Morning was too shattered to cope with this ancient dissipation at
first.

After the warring and onrushing of different faculties, a sort of
coma fell upon the evil part, and the ways of the woman came back to
him. He sat by his fire that night, the wound in his side forgotten,
the essence of Asia’s foulness in his veins, forgotten--and meditated
upon the sweetness of Betty Berry. He approached her image with a good
humility. He saw her with something of the child upon her--as if he
had suddenly become full of years. “How beautiful she was!” he would
whisper; and then he would smile sadly at the poor blind boy he had
been, not to see her beautiful at first.... To think, only three days
before, she had sent him away, because she could not endure, except
alone, the visitation of happiness that came to her. People of such
inner strength must have their secret times and places, for their
strength comes to them alone. To think that he had not understood this
at once.... He had been eloquent and did not know it.

“Hell,” he said, “that’s the only way one can say the right thing--when
he doesn’t plan it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

... If his illness had been any common thing she would not have been
frightened away. He was sure of this. It took Asia’s horror--to
frighten her away. He saw her now, how she must have fought with it.
He shuddered for her suffering on that day.... That day--why it was
only the day before yesterday.... He never realized before how the
illusion, Time, is only measurable by man’s feeling.... He was a little
surprised at Duke Fallows. He himself wouldn’t have been driven off,
if Duke had suddenly uncovered a leprous condition. He had been driven
off by Duke’s ideas, but no fear of contagion could do it. Yet Duke
was the bravest man he had ever known--in such deep and astonishing
ways courageous. Yet he had been brought up soft. He wasn’t naturally
a man-mingler. It had been too much for him. It was a staggerer--this.
Fallows was a Prince anyway. Every man to his own fear.... This was the
second morning.

Old Jethro, the rural delivery carrier, drove by that morning
without stopping. She could not have mailed her letter until last
night--another day to wait for it. Morning tried to put away the
misery. Women never think of mail-closing times. They put a letter in
the box and consider it delivered.... He puzzled on, regarding the
action of Duke Fallows, in the light of what he would have done. No
understanding came.

All thoughts returned in the course of the hours, his mind milling over
and over again the different phases, but each day had its especial
theme. The first was that he would not see Betty Berry again; that
Duke Fallows had been frightened away, the second; and on the third
morning, before dawn, he began to reckon with physical death, as if
this day’s topic had been assigned to him.

Sister Death--she had been in the shadows before. Occasionally he had
shivered afterward, when he thought of some close brush with her. She
was all right, only he had thought of her as an alien before. It really
wasn’t so--a blood sister now.... He recalled scenes in the walled
cities of China.... She had certainly put over a tough one on him....
It would be in this room. He wouldn’t wait until his appearance was
a revelation.... He would do the play. Something that he could take,
would free him from the present inertia, so he could work for a while,
a few hours a day. When the play was done--the Sister would come at
his bidding.... He had always thought of her as feminine. A line from
somewhere seemed to seize upon her very image--this time not sister,
but----

_Dark mother, always gliding near, with soft feet----_

He faced her out on that third morning. Physically there was but a
tremor about the coming. Not the suffering, but a certain touch and
shake of the heart, heaved him a little--the tough little pump stopped,
its fine incentive and its life business broken.... But that was only
the rattle of the door-knob of death.

It was all right. He wasn’t afraid. The devil, Ambition, was pretty
well strangled. There must be something that lasts, in his late-found
sense of the utter unimportance of anything the world can give--the
world which appreciates only the boyish part of a real man’s work. So
he would take out with him a reality of the emptiness of the voice
of the crowd. Then the unclean desire for drink was finished--none
of that would cling to him; moreover, no fighting passion to live on
would hold him down to the body of things.... But he would pass the
door with the love of Betty Berry--strong, young, imperious, almost
untried.... Would that come back with him? Does a matter of such
dimension die? Does one come back at all?...

Probably in this room....

Then he thought of the play that must be done in this room; and
curiously with it, identifying itself with the play and the re-forming
part of it, was the favorite word of Duke Fallows’--_Compassion_.
What a title for the play! Duke’s word and Duke’s idea.... All this
brought him to the thought of Service, as he had pictured it for Betty
Berry--a life together doing things for men--loving each other so much
that there were volumes to spare for the world--down among men--to the
deepest down man.

His throat tightened suddenly. He arose. A sob came from him.... His
control broke all at once.... How a little run of thoughts could tear
down a man’s will! It wasn’t fear at all--but the same depiction
running in his mind that had so affected Betty Berry when she begged to
be alone....

“The deepest down man--the deepest down man.... It is I, Duke!...
Surely you must have meant me all the time!”

       *       *       *       *       *

But it passed quickly, properly whipped and put away with other
matters--all but a certain relating together of the strange trinity,
Death, Service, and Betty Berry--which he did not venture to play
with, for fear of relapse.... He had been eating nothing. He must go
to Hackensack. The little glass showed him a haggard and unshaven John
Morning, but there was nothing of the uncleanness about the face in
reflection.... He heard the “giddap” of Jethro far on the road. The old
rig was coming.... It stopped at his box. He hurried down the hill.


                                  18

TWO letters; one from Duke Fallows. Morning opened this on
the way up the slope. He was afraid of the other. He wanted to be in
the cabin with the door shut--when that other was opened.... Fallows
was joyous and tender--just a few lines written on the way west:
“... I won’t be long in ’Frisco. I know that already. The _Western
States_ does very well without me.... Soon on the long road to Asia
and Russia. I must look up Lowenkampf again before going home. He was
good to us, wasn’t he, John?... And you, this old heart thrills for
you. You are coming on. I don’t know anything more you need. I say you
are coming on. You’ll do the Play and the Book.... John, you ought to
write the book of the world’s heart.... And then you will get so full
of the passion to serve men that writing won’t be enough. You will have
to go down among them again--and labor and lift among men. Things have
formed about you for this.... We are friends.... I am coming back for
the harvest.”

The sun had come out. Morning was standing in the doorway as he
finished. The lemon-colored light fell upon the paper.... It wasn’t
like Duke to write in this vein--after running away. He repeated aloud
a sentence to this effect. Then he went in, shut the door, and, almost
suffocating from the tension, read the letter of Betty Berry.

It was just such a letter as would have sent him to her, before his
realization of the illness.... He saw her torture to be kind, and yet
not to lift his hopes. It was different from Fallows’, in that it
fitted exactly to what he now knew about himself. And he had to believe
from the pages that she loved him. There was an eternal equality to
that.... The air seemed full of service. Two letters from his finest
human relations, each stirring him to service. He did not see this
just now with the touch of bitterness that might have flavored it all
another time.... What was there about him that made them think of him
so? If they only knew how meager and tainted so much of his thinking
was. Some men can never make the world see how little they are.

He wrote to Betty Berry. Calm came to him, and much the best moments
that he had known in the three days. He was apt to be a bit lyrical
as a letter-lover--he whose words were so faltering face to face with
the woman. Thoughts of the play came to his writing. He was really in
touch with himself again. He would never lose that. He would work every
day. When a man’s work comes well--he can face anything.... The play
was begun the fourth day, and, on the fifth, another letter from Betty
Berry. This was almost all about his work. She had seized upon this
subject, and her letters lifted his inspiration. She could share his
work. There was real union in that....

He was forgetting his devil for an hour at a time. There were moments
of actual peace and well-being. He did not suffer more than the pain he
had been accustomed to so long. And then, a real spring day breathed
over the hill.

That morning, without any heat of producing, and without any elation
from a fresh letter from the woman, he found that in his mind to say
aloud:

“I’m ready for what comes.”

By a really dramatic coincidence, within ten minutes after this
fruitage of fine spirit, John Morning found an old unopened envelope
from Nevin, the little doctor of the _Sickles_. He had recalled
some data on Liaoyang while inspecting the morning--something that
might prove valuable for the play, in the old wallet he had carried
afield. Looking for this in the moulded leather, he found the letter
Nevin had left in the Armory, before departing--just a little before
Betty Berry came that day.... Nevin had not come back. But Noyes and
Field had come.

Morning remembered that Nevin had spoken that morning of finding
something for the wound that would not heal.... The remedy was Chinese.
The Doctor knew of its existence, but had procured the name with great
difficulty in the Chinese quarter.... Morning was to fast ten days
while taking the treatment.

       *       *       *       *       *

He went about it with a laugh. The message had renewed his deep
affection for Nevin. It had come forth from the hidden place where
Nevin now toiled, (secretly trying, doubtless, to cover every
appearance of his humanity).... He remembered how Nevin had studied
the wound that refused to heal. The last thing had been his report on
that. When there was nothing more to be offered but felicities--he had
vanished.

Morning did not leap into any expectancy that he was to be healed,
but thoughts of Nevin gave him another desire after the play and the
book--to trace the great-hearted little man before the end. Nevin would
be found somewhere out among the excessive desolations. If it may be
understood, the idea of mortal sickness remained in Morning’s mind at
this time, mainly as a barrier between him and Betty Berry.

Nevin’s drug was procured in New York. Hackensack failed utterly in
this.... On the third day, Morning suffered keenly for the need of
food. A paragraph from Betty Berry on the subject of the fasting at
this time completely astonished him; indeed, shook the basic conviction
as to the meaning of her departure:

“... I have often thought you did not seem so well after I returned
from Europe, as you were when we parted. But the ten days will do for
you, something that makes whatever might happen in the body seem so
little and unavailing.... Don’t you see, you are doing what every
one, destined to be a world-teacher, has done?... What amazes me
continually, is that you seem to be brought, one by one, to these
things by exterior processes, rather than through any will of your
own.... The Hebrew prophets were all called upon to do this in order to
listen better. Recall, too, the coming forth from the Wilderness of the
Baptist, and the forty days in the wilderness of the Master Himself.
Why, it is part of the formula! You will do more than improve the
physical health; you will hear your message more clearly.... I sit and
think--in the very hush of expectancy for you.”

As the evidences came, so they vanished. She could not have fled
from him in the fear of leprosy and written in this way; nor could
Duke Fallows, who was first of all unafraid of fleshly things. The
conviction of his taint, and of its incurableness, daily weakened.
Before the ten days passed, the last vestige of the horror was cleaned
away. Illusion--and yet the mental battle through which he had passed,
and which, through three terrible days, had shaken him body and soul,
was just as real in the graving of its experience upon the fabric of
his being as was the journey to Koupangtse, done hand and foot and
horse. He perceived that man, farther advanced in the complications of
self-consciousness, covers ground in three days and masters a lesson
that would require a life to learn in the dimness and leisure of simple
consciousness.

There was no way of missing this added fact: He, John Morning, was not
designed to lean. He had been whipped and spurred through another dark
hollow in the valley of the shadow, to show him again, and finally,
that he was not intended for leaning upon others, yet must have an
instant appreciation of the suffering of others. He had been forced to
fight his own way to a certain poise, through what was to him, at the
time, actual abandonment in distress, by the woman and the friend he
loved. Moreover, he had accepted death; resignation to death in its
most horrible form had been driven into his soul--an important life
lesson, which whole races of men have died to learn.

He was seeing very clearly.... He bathed continually both in water and
sunlight, lying in the open doorway as the Spring took root on his hill
and below. Often he mused away the hours, with Betty Berry’s letters
in his hand--too weak almost to stir at last, but filled with ease and
well-being, such as he had never known. Water from the Spring was all
he needed, and the activity of mind was pure and unerring, as if he
were lifted above the enveloping mists of the senses, through which he
had formerly regarded life.

Everything now was large and clear. Life was like a coast of splendid
altitude, from which he viewed the mighty distances of gilded and
cloud-shadowed sea, birds sailing vast-pinioned and pure, the breakers
sounding a part of the majestic harmony of granite and sea and sky; the
sun God-like, and the stars vast and pure like the birds.

When he actually looked with his eyes, it was as if he had come back,
a man, to some haunt of childhood. The little hill was just as lovely,
a human delight in the unbudded elms, a soft and childish familiarity
in the new greens of the sun-slope grass. The yellow primrose was
first to come, for yellow answers the thinnest, farthest sunlight. The
little cabin was like a cocoon. He was but half-out. Soon the stronger
sunlight would set him free--then to the wings.... One afternoon he
stared across to the haze of the great city. His eyes smarted with the
thought of the Charleys and the sisters, of the _Boabdils_ and the
slums.... Then, at last, he thought of Betty Berry waiting and thinking
of him ... “in the very hush of expectancy.” The world was very dear
and wonderful, and his love for her was in it all.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the ninth day that the bandage slipped from him, as clean as
when he put it on the day before, and when he opened the door of the
cabin he heard the first robin.... There was a sweeping finality in
the way it had come from Nevin, and the quality of the man lived in
Morning’s appreciation. His friends were always gone before he knew how
fine they were.

He was slow to realize that the days of earth-life were plentiful for
him, in the usual course. A man is never the same after he has accepted
death.... And it had all come in order.... He could look into her eyes
and say, “Betty Berry, whatever you want, is right for me, but I think
it would be best for you to tell me everything. We are strong--and if
we are not to be one together, we should talk it over and understand
perfectly.”...

How strange he had missed this straight way. There had been so much
illusion before. His body was utterly weak, but his mind saw more
clearly and powerfully than ever.

The Play was conceived as a whole that ninth day. The sun came warmly
in, while he wrote at length of the work, as he finally saw it.... On
the tenth day he drank a little milk and slept in his chair by the
doorway.... There was one difficult run that the robin went over a
hundred and fifty times, at least.


                                  19

BETTY BERRY watched the progress of the fasting with a mothering
intensity. She saw that which had been lyrical and impassioned
give way to the workman, the deeper-seeing artist. He was not
less human; his humanity was broadened. From one of his pages,
she read how he had looked across at the higher lights of New York
one clear March night. His mind had been suddenly startled by a swift
picture of the fighting fool he had been, and of the millions there,
beating themselves and each other to death for vain things.... She
saw his Play come on in the days that followed the fasting. There
was freshness in his voice. She did not know that he had accepted
death, but she saw that he was beginning to accept her will in their
separation.

And this is what she had tried to bring about, but her heart was
breaking. Dully she wondered if her whole life were not breaking. The
something implacable which she had always felt in being a woman, held
her like a matrix of iron now. Her life story had been a classic of
suffering, yet she had never suffered before.

A letter from him, (frequently twice a day, they came) and it was
her instant impulse to answer, almost as if he had spoken. And when
she wrote--all the woman’s life of her had to be cut from it--cut
again and again--until was left only what another might say.... She
was forced to learn the terrible process of elimination which only
the greater artists realize, and which they learn only through years
of travail--that selection of the naked absolute, according to their
vision, all the senses chiseled away. His work, his health, especially
the clear-seeing that came from purifying of the body, the detachment
of his thoughts from physical emotions--of these, which were clear to
her as the impulses of instinct--she allowed herself to write. But
the woman’s heart of flesh, which had fasted so long for love, so
often found its way to her pages, and forced them to be done again....
Certain of his paragraphs dismayed her, as:

“Does it astonish you,” he asked, almost joyously, “when I say there is
something about Betty Berry beyond question--such a luxurious sense
of truth?... I feel your silences and your listenings between every
sentence. It is not what you say, though in words you seem to know what
I am to-day, and what I shall be to-morrow--but all about the words,
are _you_--those perfect hesitations, the things which I seemed
to know at first, but could not express. They were much too fine for a
medium of expression which knew only wars, horses, and the reporting of
words and deeds of men.... Why, the best thing in my heart is its trust
for you, Betty Berry. Looking back upon our hours together, I can see
now that all the misunderstandings were mine and all the truth yours.
When it seems to me that we should be together, and the memories come
piling back--those perfect hours--I say, because of this trust, ‘Though
it is not as I would have it, her way is better. And I know I shall
come to see it, because she cannot be wrong.’”

So she could not hide her heart from him, even though she put down what
seemed to her unworthiness and evasion, and decided through actual
brain-process what was best to say. A new conduct of life was not
carrying Betty Berry up into the coolness beyond the senses. Fasting
would never bring that to her. Fasting of the body was so simple
compared to the fasting of the heart which had been her whole life. Nor
could she ever rise long from the sense of the serpent in woman which
she had realized from the words of his Guardian--not a serpent to the
usual man, but to the man who was destined to love the many instead of
one.... She loved him as a woman loves--the boy, the lover, the man of
him--the kisses, the whispers, the arms of strength, the rapture of
nearness....

He must have been close to the spirit of that night at the theatre,
when this was written:

“The letter to-day, with the plaintive note in it, has brought you
even closer. I never think of you as one who can be tried seriously;
always as one finished, with infinite patience, and no regard at all
for the encompassing common. Of course, I know differently, know that
you must suffer, you who are so keenly and exquisitely animate--but you
have an un-American poise.... You played amazingly. I loved that at
once. There was a gleam about it. Betty Berry’s gleaming. I faced you
from the wings that night. I wanted to come up behind you. You were all
music.... But I love even better the instrument of emotions you have
become. That must be what music is for--to sensitize one’s life, to
make it more and more responsive....”

Then in a different vein:

“... The long forenoons, wherein we grow.... Yes, I knew you were a
tree-lover; that the sound of running water was dear to you ... and
the things you dream of ... work and play and forest scents and the
wind in the branches.... Sometimes it seems to me--is it a saying of
lovers?--that we should be boy and girl together.... Why, I’ve only
just now learned to be a boy. There was so much of crudity and desire
and anguish-to-do-greatly-at-any-cost--until just a little ago. But
I’ve never had a boyhood that could have known you. I wasn’t ready for
such loveliness in the beginning.... I’ve wanted terribly to go to you,
but that is put away for the time.”

These lines wrung her heart. “Oh, no,” she cried, “you have not learned
how to become a boy. There was never a time you were not ready--until
now! You are becoming a man--and the little girl--oh, she is a little
girl in her heart....”

Everything his Guardian had promised was coming to be. He was changing
into a man. That would take him from her at the last--even letters,
this torrent of his thoughts of life and work. She saw the first
process of it--as the Play grasped him finally--the old tragedy of a
man turning from a woman to his work....

She built the play from the flying sparks.... He was thronged with
illusions of production. How badly he had done it before, he said, and
how perfect had proved the necessity to wait, and to do it a second
time.... Even the most unimaginative audience must build the great
battle picture from the headquarters scene; then the trampled arena of
the Ploughman, deep in the hollow of that valley, and his coming forth
through the millet....

“... It’s so simple,” he wrote in fierce haste. “You see, I remember
how hard it was for me to grasp that first night, when Fallows brought
in the story to the Russian headquarters.... I have remembered that. I
have made it _so that I could see it then_. And I was woven in and
fibred over with coarseness, from months of life in Liaoyang and from
the day’s hideous brutality. I have measured my slowness and written
to quicken such slowness as that. The mystery is, it is not spoiled by
such clearness. It is better--it never lets you alone. It won’t let you
lie to yourself. You can’t be the same after reading it.... And it goes
after the deepest down man.... Every line is involved in action.

“The third act--sometime we’ll see it together--how the main character
leaves the field and goes out in search of the Ploughman’s hut, across
Asia and Europe; how he reaches there--the old father and mother, the
six children, the one little boy, who has the particular answer for
the man’s lonely love--the mother of the six, common, silent, angular,
her skirt hanging square, as Duke put it--but she is big enough for
every one to get into her heart. You will see the fear of her man’s
death, which the stranger’s presence brings to her, though he leaves it
to Russia to inform the family. You will see the beautiful mystery of
compassion that he brings, too. That’s the whole shine of the piece.
And it came from the ministry of pain.

... “I’m not praising _my_ Play--it isn’t. It’s Duke’s almost
every word of it--every thought, the work of Duke’s disciple. I
have merely felt it all and made it clear--clear. You see it all.
Many thousands must see, and see what the name means. It’s the most
wonderful word in the world to me, _Compassion_.”

Then came the break for a day, and the flash that his work on the Play
was finished. “The cabin will be harder for me now. The new work is
only a dream so far--and this goes to Markheim to-day.... It is very
queer that I should go back to Markheim, but somehow I want to pick up
that failure. There are other reasons.... I shall tell him that he can
have five days. I’m just getting ready to go across the River.... My
health was almost never better. I’m not tired. The work has seemed to
replenish me, as your letters do. But that last letter--yesterday’s--it
seems to come from behind a screen, where other voices were--the loved
tones troubled and crowded out by others. It left me restless and more
than ever longing to see you. It is as if there were centuries all
unintelligible, to be made clear only by being with you. The world and
the other voices drown yours----”

She felt the instinct of centuries to hold out her arms to him--arms
of the woman, after man’s task in the world--home at evening with the
prize of the hunt and battle. The world for the day, the woman for the
night--that is man’s way. She seemed to know it now from past eternity.
And for woman--day and night the man of her thoughts.... She was afraid
of her every written word now. Her heart answered every thrill of his;
the murmuring and wrestling resistance of his against the miles, was
hers ten-fold.... The days of the fasting had not been like this, nor
the two weeks that followed in which he had completed the play....
April had come. She was ill. Her music was neglected altogether. Her
friend, Helen Quiston, never faltered in her conception of the beauty
and the mystery of the separation. With all her will, Helen sustained
her against the relinquishing of the lofty ideal of sacrifice, and
tried to distract her impassioned turning to the east.... She would
hold to the death; Betty Berry knew this.

“It’s harder now that the play is done,” Betty repeated. “He can’t be
driven instantly to work again. I can’t lie to him. He doesn’t fight
me--he thinks I’m right--that’s the unspeakable part of it. There is
nothing for me to write about except his work....”

And Helen Quiston found her, a half-hour afterward, staring out of
the window, exactly as she had left--her hands in her lap exactly the
same.... Betty Berry was thinking unutterable things, having to do with
adorable meetings in the theatre-wings--of wonderful night journeys,
all night talking--of waiting in a little room, and at the head of the
stairs. There was an invariable coming back to the first kiss in the
wings of the theatre.

“We were real--we were true to each other that night--true as little
children. We needed no words,” this was her secret story.... “Oh, I
waited so long for him ... and we could have gone out together and
served in a little way. But they would not let us alone.”

He had been across to New York.... The second morning after the play
was finished, she received a letter with a rather indescribable ending.
He told her of fears and strangeness, of intolerable longing for
something to happen that would bring them together.... The rest is here:

“I’m a bit excited by the thought that just came to me. And another,
but I won’t tell you yet, for fear.... I don’t quite understand myself.
I seem afraid. I think I would ask more of myself than I would of
another man just now. There seem all about me invisible restraints.
Something deep within recognizes the greatness and finality of your
meaning to me.... It is true, you do not leave the strength to me.
Did you ever--? No, I won’t ask that.... This letter isn’t kind to
you--unsettling, strange, full of an intensity to see and be with
you....”

Moments afterwards, as she was standing at the piano--the letter
trailing from her hand--the telephone in the inner room startled her
like a human cry.


                                  20

IT was Morning. She did not remember his words nor her answers--only
that she had told him he might come up-town to her. He had dropped
the receiver then, as if it burned him.

So, it was a matter of minutes. Nothing was ready. Least of all, was
she ready. She could hardly stand. She had forgotten at first, and it
had required courage, of late, to look in the mirror. She would have
given up, before what she saw now, but a robin was singing in the
foliage by the rear windows. She went out to open the studio door into
the hall, then retired to the inner room again.... “He can heal you,
and bring back the music,” her heart whispered, but her mind cowered
before herself, and this mate of herself, Helen Quiston, and before his
Guardian.... She heard his step on the stair ... called to him to wait
in the studio. He was pacing to and fro.

Morning felt the light resistance in her arms. His kiss fell upon her
cheek. He held her at arm’s length, looking into her face.

She laughed, repeating that she was not ill.... She was always thinner
in summer, she said. In her withholding, there was destructiveness for
the zeal he had brought; and that which she set herself resolutely to
impart--the sense of their separateness--found its lodgment in his
nature. It would always be there now, she thought; it would augment,
like ice about a spring in early winter, until the frost sealed the
running altogether. The lover was stayed, though his mind would not yet
believe.

“Is it really possible,” he said, sitting before her restlessly, “that
I am here in your house, and that I can stay, and talk with you, and
see you and hear you play? I have thought about it so much that it’s
hard to realize.”

“It is quite what a lover would say,” she thought.... She had to watch
her words. Her heart went out to him, but her mind remembered the work
to do.... Self-consciousness, and a weighing of words--how horrible
between _them_!

“And what made you come? I had just read your letter, when the
telephone rang----”

“I shouldn’t have sent that letter,” he answered. “I must have sent it
because of the things I thought, and didn’t write.... The night before,
I had come home to the cabin--after Markheim and the city. It was
dreadful--with the work gone. Yesterday was too much for me--the Spring
day--alone--not ready to begin again--you here.... I got to thinking
about you so fast--and the shame of it, for us to be apart--that I
couldn’t endure it.... I thought of going to you in a month--in a
week; and then when the letter was mailed, I thought of it being with
you this morning.... A thousand things poured into my mind. It seemed
finally as if everything was wrong between us; as if I had already
remained too long from you. It was like fighting devils.... And then I
tried to beat the letter to you, but it got here by an earlier train
this morning.”

He was like a child to her, telling about something that had frightened
him.

Their silences were strained. His eyes had a sleepless look. Betty
saw it working upon him--the repulsion that had gone from her. She
wished she might go to his arms and die. It suddenly came over her--the
uselessness of it all--the uselessness of being a woman, of waiting, of
final comprehension--all for this rending.... Yet she saw what would
happen if she followed her heart. He would take her. There would be a
radiant season, for the lover within him was not less because his work
was for other men. But there was also within him (his Guardian had
made her believe it) her rival, a solitary stranger come to the world
for service, who would not delay long to show him how he had betrayed
his real work, how he had caged his greater self, his splendid pinions
useless.... Morning would hear the world calling for work he could not
do.

“_There seem all about me invisible restraints._”

This from the letter of the morning--alone remained with her. It
expressed it all. The sentence uprose in her mind. It was more dominant
to her than if a father had forbade his coming, or even if by his
coming another was violated.

All the forbiddings that Society can bring against desire are but
symbols compared to the invisible restraints of a full man’s nature.
Men who are held by symbols, ruled by exterior voices and fears, are
not finished enough to be a law unto themselves.... It wasn’t the
terror of these thoughts, but tenderness in answer to his hurried
tumble of explanation regarding his coming, that had filled Betty’s
eyes. He caught the sparkle of a tear in profile, and came to her.

“It’s like creating--visibly, without hands, but with thoughts--creating
a masterpiece--to see the tears come like that----”

He drew a chair to the bench where she sat, her back to the piano.
Helen Quiston was away, as usual, for the forenoon.

“It is creating--another world,” she answered steadily.

He stared at her. She saw again that sleepless look.

“You’ve been a whole month on a lofty ridge--just think of it--fasting
and pure expression of self--spiritual self-revelation----”

It seemed to him there was a suggestion in what she said for the new
book.

“And now you are down in the meadows again,” she finished.

“The earth-sweet meadows--with you.”

He could not know what the words meant to her; that there was no
quarter in them for her. She did not belong to his ascents.

“Somehow I always think of you as belonging best to the evenings, the
hushed earth, the sweetness of the rest-time. You make me remember what
to do, and how to do it well. Why, just now you made me see clearly for
a second what I must do next. You make me love people better--when I am
close to you.”

She was not to be carried away by these givings which would have made
many a woman content.

“Remember, I have had your letters every day. You are very dear to me
up there. You have been down in the meadows--and in the caverns--much.
You are not ready to return--even for the evenings. You stand now for
austere purity--for plain, ancient, mother’s knee ideals. You must not
delude yourself. A man must be apart in order to see. You did not begin
really to live--until you drew apart.”

He felt her stripping his heart. His face lifted in agony, and his
eyes caught the picture on the wall of the meeting of Beatrice and
Dante. The Florentine woman seemed not to touch the earth; the poet was
awed, mystic in the fusion of their united powers. It was fateful that
Morning saw the picture at this instant.

“Look,” he said, “what the world has from the meeting of that man and
woman--an immortal poem!”

“But Beatrice passed on----”

“She became identified with his greater power, Betty. She was one with
it----”

“By passing on!”

He arose and lifted her to her feet, and his arms did not relinquish
her.

“And you mean that you would pass on?... You must not. You must not. We
would both be broken and bewildered. I love you. I have come to you.
I want to be near--and work with you. I know you all, and shall love
you always. I have come to you, and I must stay--or you must come with
me----”

Her resistance was broken for the moment. An icy burden fell from her.
She clung to him, and tears helped her.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were together again in the studio that afternoon. Betty Berry was
making tea, her strength renewed. Helen Quiston had come and gone.
Morning had been away for an hour.

“Strange man,” she said, “let us reason together.... You are working
now for men. That is right, but when you are full of power, when you
come really into the finished man you are to be, and all these hard
years have healed beyond the last ache--you will work for women. Does
it sound strange from me, that the inspiration of the world to-day is
with the women? Why, it seems to me that men are caught in the very
science of cruelty. And then, the women of to-day represent the men of
the future. When one of the preparers of the way brings his gospel to
women, he kindles the inspiration of the next generation. But this fire
can only come from the solitary heights--never from the earth-sweet
meadows----”

He shook his head.

“The men who have done the most beautiful verses and stories about
children--have had no children of their own. A man cannot be the father
of his country and the father of a house. The man who must do the
greatest work for women must hunger for the _vision_ of Woman, and
not be yoked with one.... It is so clear. It is always so.”

“All that you say makes me love you more, Betty----”

“Don’t, dear. Don’t make it harder for me.... It is not I that thrills
you. It is my speaking of your work that fills your heart with
gladness--the things you feel to do----”

“They are from you----”

“Don’t say that. It is not true.”

“But I never saw so clearly----”

“Then go away with the vision. Oh, John Morning, you cannot listen to
yourself--with a woman in the room!”

He lifted his shoulders, drawing her face to his. “I was going to
say, you are my wings,” he whispered. “But that is not it. You are my
fountain. I would come to you and drink----”

“But not remain----”

“I love your thoughts, Betty, your eyes and lips----”

“Because you are athirst----”

“I shall always be athirst!”

“That is not nature.”

He shuddered.

“Do men, however athirst--remain at the oases? Men of strength--would
they not long to go? Would they not remember the far cities and the
long, blinding ways of the sun?”

“But you could go with me--” he exclaimed.

“That is not nature!”

He was the weaker. “But you have gone alone to the far cities, and the
long, blinding ways of the sun----”

“Yes, alone. But with you--a time would come when I could not. We are
man and woman. There would be little children. I would stay--and you
could not leave them.... Oh, they are not for you, dear. They would
weaken your courage. You would love them. At the end of the day, you
would want them, and the mother again.... The far cities would not hear
you; the long, blinding ways of the sun would know you no more----”

“Betty,” he whispered passionately, “how wonderfully sweet that would
be!”

“Yes ... to the mother ... but _you_--I can see it in your eyes.
You would remember Nineveh, that great city....”

       *       *       *       *       *

Darkness was about them.

“Betty Berry--you would rather I wouldn’t take the train to you
again--not even when it seems I cannot stay longer away?”

She did not answer.

“Betty----”

“Yes....”

She left him and crossed to the far window.

“Would you not have me come to you again--at all?”

She could not hold the sentence, and her answer. The room was terrible.
It seemed filled with presences that suffocated her--that cared nothing
for her. All day they had inspired her to speak and answer--and now
they wanted her death. She moved to the ’cello. Her hands fluttered
along the strings--old, familiar ways--but making hardly a sound.... If
she did not soon speak, he would come to her. She would fail again--the
touch of him, and she would fail.

“Betty, is there never to be--the fountain at evening?”

“You know--you know--” she cried out. Words stuck after that. She had
not a thought to drive them.

He arose.

“Don’t,” she implored. “Don’t come to me! I cannot bear it.”

... It was his final rebellion.

“I am not a preparer of the way. I have not a message. I am sick of the
thought. I am just a man--and I love you!”

At last she made her stand, and on a different position. “I could not
love you--if that were true.”

       *       *       *       *       *

She heard him speak, but not the words. She heard the crackling and
whirring of flames. He did not cross the room.... She had risen, her
arms groping toward him. She felt him approach, and the flames were
farther.... She must not speak of flames.

“You will go away soon--won’t you?” she whispered, as he took her.

“Yes, to-night----”

“Yes--to-night,” she repeated.

She was lying upon the couch in the studio, and his chair was beside
her.

“No, don’t light anything--no light!... It is just an hour.... I could
not think of food until you go. But you may bring me a drink of water.
On the way to the train, you can have your supper.... I will play--play
in the dark, and think of you--as you go----”

She talked evenly, a pause between sentences. There was a tensity in
the formation of words, for the whirring and crackling distracted,
dismayed her. Her heart was breaking. This she knew. When it was
finished, he would be free.... The flames were louder and nearer, as he
left for the drink of water. She called to him to light a match, if he
wished, in the other room.... He was in her room. She knew each step,
just where. He was there. It was as if he were finally materialized
from her thoughts in the night, her dreaming and writing to him. His
hand touched her dresser. She heard the running water ... and then it
was all red and rending and breathless, until she felt the water to her
lips. Always, as he came near, the flames receded.

And out of all the chaos, the figure of the craftsman had returned
to him. The world had revealed itself to him as never before in the
passage of time. She had given him her very spirit that day, and the
strength of all her volition from the month of brooding upon the
conception of his Guardian. Literally on that day the new Book was
conceived, as many a man’s valorous work has begun to be, in a woman’s
house--her blood and spirit, its bounty.

“This is a holy place to me, this room,” he said, the agonies of
silence broken. “I can feel the white floods of spirit that drive the
world.”

She did not need to answer. She held fast to herself, lest something
betray her. Darkness was salvation. All that his Guardian had asked was
in her work. John Morning told it off, sentence by sentence. It took
her life, but he must not know. She thought she would die immediately
after he was gone--but, strangely, now the suffering was abated.... She
was helping.... Was not that the meaning of life--to give, to help, to
love?... Someone had said so.

He lifted her, carried her in his arms, talked and praised her.

“There’s something deathlessly bright about you, Betty Berry!” he
whispered. “I am going--but we are one! Don’t you feel it? You are
loving the world from my heart!”

To the door, but not to the light, she walked with him.... Up the
stairs he strode a last time to take her in his arms.

“We are one--a world-loving one--remember that!”

She did not know why, but as he kissed her--she thought of the pitcher
broken at the fountain.

It was all strange light and singing flame.... She was lost in the
hall. She laughed strangely.... She must play him on his way....
Someone helped her through the raining light--until she could feel the
strings.




BOOK III.

THE BARE-HEADED MAN


                                   1

THE red head of the little telephone-miss bowed over the
switch-board when Morning entered Markheim’s. She colored, smiled; all
metropolitan outrages of service forgotten. Charley waved furtively
from afar; the door to the inner office opened.

“Well?” said the manager.

“Well, Mr. Markheim?”

“You have come too soon.”

“I said--five days.”

“We read no play in five days.”

“It was left here on that basis.”

“Nonsense.”

“You can give it to me now.”

“It is being read now. Your title is rotten. The old one was better.”

“That title will grow on you,” said Morning, who began to like the
interview. “I shall come to take the play to-morrow--unless you decide
to keep it and bring it out this Fall----”

“Why did you come to Markheim again? Have you tried all the rest?”

“There was something unfinished about our former brush--I didn’t like
the feel of it.... My play is done over better. Neither copy has been
submitted--except to Markheim.”

“Your play may be as bad as before.”

“Yes. It looks better to me, however.”

“You’ve got a war play again----”

“That first and second act.”

“You can’t write war. This is not war----”

Morning did not realize the change that had come over him until he
recalled the shame and rebellion that had risen in his mind when
Markheim had said this before.... Something had come to him from Duke
Fallows, or from Betty Berry, or from the hill silences. He was a new
creature.... Must one be detached somewhat from the world in order to
use it? This was his sense at the moment: that he could compel the mind
before him, reinforced as it was by distaste for everything decent,
and manifesting the opinions of other men, including Reever Kennard’s.
There was no irritation whatsoever; no pride in being a war-writer,
good or bad. Markheim’s denial had no significance in the world above
or water beneath. He saw, however, that he must change Markheim’s idea,
and that he must do it by beating Markheim in his own particular zone
of activity.

There was a certain fun in this. He arose and stood by the other’s
chair. The eye-balls showed wider and rolled heavily. The pistol or
bomb was never far from his mind. Morning looked down at him, saying
quietly:

“You said something like that before, and it wasn’t your opinion--it
was Reever Kennard’s. I don’t object to it exactly, but I want to show
you something. You know Reever Kennard’s paper?”

Markheim nodded.

“You know the _World-News_ sent him out to the Russo-Japanese
war--big expense account, helpers, dress-suits, and all that?”

“I know he was there.”

“The same managing editor who sent Reever Kennard out is still on the
desk. He should be in the office now. The number is----”

Morning found it for him hastily, and added: “You call him now.”

“I don’t want to call him up----”

“But you’d better. Twice you said something that someone told you--and
it’s troublesome. The short way out is to call him now----”

Morning was tapping the desk lightly. Markheim reached for the
extension ’phone. Luckily, the thing was managed--luckily, and through
the name of Markheim.

“Ask him who did the story of the battle of Liaoyang for the
_World-News_?” Morning ordered.

The question was asked and the answer came back.

“Ask him if it was a good story--and how long.”

It was asked and answered.

“Ask him if it was conceded to be the best story of the war published
in America.”

The talk was extended this time, Markheim explaining why he asked.

“What did he say?” Morning asked.

“He said it was all right,” Markheim granted pertly. “Only that there
was a very good story from another man on Port Arthur--afterward.”

“That is true. There was a heady little chap got into Port Arthur--and
came out strong.... Now, look here----”

Morning went to the case where a particularly recent encyclopædia
was drawn forth. He referred to the war, but especially to the final
paragraph of the article, captioned “Bibliography.”... His own name and
the name of his book was cited as the principal American reference....
It was all laughable. No one knew better than Morning that such action
would be silly among real people.

“You don’t see Reever Kennard referred to, do you--as authority
of war-stuff?... The point is that you play people get so much
counterfeit color and office-setting--that you naturally can’t look
authoritatively on the real thing.... However, the fact that I know
more about the battle of Liaoyang than any other man in America would
never make a good play. There’s a lot beside in this play--a lot more
than at first----”

“They have your play out now--reading it,” Markheim observed.

Morning added: “It’s clear to you, isn’t it, why Mr. Reever Kennard
didn’t care for the John Morning play----?”

Markheim’s eyes gleamed. This was pure business. “You had the goods and
delivered it in his own office----”

“Exactly----”

“You bother me too much about this play. The title is rotten----”

“You’ll like that, when you see Markheim with it. There’s a
peculiar thing about the word--it doesn’t die. It never rests. It’s
human--divine, too. There’s a cry in it--to some happiness, to some
sorrow--to the many, hope.... It sings. I would rather have it than
glory.... Listen, ‘_Markheim Offers Compassion_’--why, that’s a
God’s business--offering compassion----”

“You feel like a song-bird this afternoon, Mr. Morning----”

“I’ll be back to-morrow----”

“Too soon----”

“Can’t help it. It’s ready. It will be the big word this Winter. You
can read it in an hour. I’m off to-morrow--from Markheim. The Winter
will clear my slate in this office, whether you take it or not----”

“Come back at noon----”

Charley’s sister looked up from her pad. Her swift change of expression
to a certain shyness and pleasure, too, in a sort of mutual secret,
added to Morning’s merriment as he left the building.... He wondered
continually that afternoon what had come over him. He had not been
able to do this sort of thing before. The astonishing thing was his
detachment from any tensity of interest. It was all right either way,
according to his condition of mind. The question was important: Must a
man be aloof from the fogging ruck of accepted activities in order to
see them, and to manage best among things as they are?

There was the new book, too. Betty Berry had given him the new task.
A splendor had come to life--even with the unspeakable sadness of the
ending of that day. The beauty of that day would never die. Every phase
of her sacrifice revealed a subtle, almost superhuman, faith in him.
Was it this--her faith in him--that made him so new and so strong;
that made him know in his heart that if the Play were right--it would
go in spite of Markheim, in spite of all New York? And if it were not
right, certainly he did not want it to go.... Markheim and New York--he
regarded them that night from his doorstep; then turned his back to the
city, and faced the west and the woman.

It broke upon him. She was mothering him. She was bringing to his
action all that was real and powerful--fighting for it, against every
desire and passion of her own. Her wish for his good was superior to
her own wish for happiness. She gave him his work and his dreams. He
knew not what mystery of prayer and concentration she poured upon
him.... This place in which she had never been was filled with her. The
little frail creature was playing upon him, as upon her instrument.
Moments were his in which she seemed a mighty artist.

And then he saw men everywhere--just instruments--but played upon by
forces of discord and illusion.... He saw these men clearly, because
he had been of them. Such forces had played upon him.... He had been
buffeted and whipped along the rough ways. He had looked up to the
slaughterers of the wars as unto men of greatness. He had been played
upon by the thirsts and the sufferings, by greed and ambition. He had
hated men. He had fumed at bay before imagined wrongs; and yet no one
had nor could wrong him, but himself.

One by one he had been forced to fight it out with his own devils--to
the last ditch. There they had quit--vanished like puffs of nasty
smoke. He had stood beneath Reever Kennard, almost poisoning himself
to death with hatred. Pure acknowledgment this, that his life moved
in the same scope of evil.... He had accepted the power of Markheim,
feared it, and suffered over the display of it. Now he found it puny
and laughable. He had worked for himself, and it had brought him only
madness and shattering of force. He had been brought to death, had
accepted it in its most hideous form--and risen over it.... His hill
was calm and sweet in the dusk. Though his heart was lonely--and though
all this clear-seeing seemed not so wonderful as it would be to have
the woman with him in the cabin--yet it was all very good. He felt
strong, his fighting force not abated.

He had his work. She had shown him that. He would write every line to
her. His work would lift him up, as the days of the Play had lifted
him--out of the senses and the usual needs of man. He would be with
her, in that finer communion of instrument and artist.... The world
was very old and dear. Men’s hearts were troubled, but men’s evils
were very trifling, when all was understood. He would never forget his
lessons. He would tell everyone what miracles are performed in the
ministry of pain.... He looked into the dark of the west and loved her.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Well, you are on time,” said Markheim the following noon.

“Yes,” Morning said with calmness and cheer.

“We will take the play. I have had it read.... We can do no more than
bust.”

“This Fall--the production?”

“I will give it the _Markheim_ in November.”

He seemed to be surprised that Morning did not emotionalize in some
way. He had expected at least to be informed that “bust” was out of the
question, and missed this mannerism of the playwright, now that the
thing was his and not the other’s.... Moreover, Markheim was pleased
with the way he had reached the decision. He wanted Morning to know.

“There was that difference of opinion.... Do you know what I did?”

Morning couldn’t imagine.

“Well,” said Markheim, sitting back, hands patting his girth, “those
who have nothing but opinions--read your play. They like it; they
like it not. It will pay. It will not pay. It is ‘revolutionary,’
‘artistic,’ ‘well-knit,’ ‘good second act’--much rot it is, and is not.
Who do you think settled the question?”

“Yourself?”

“Not me--I have no opinion.”

“Who then?”

“The friend of no man.” It was said with grandeur.

Morning waited.

Markheim leaned forward, beaming not unkindly, and whispered:

“The little one at the switch-board outside the door. She said it was
‘lovely.’... Oh, she’s a sharp little spider.”


                                   2

HERE is an extra bit of the fabric, that goes along with the garment
for mending.... Mid-May, and never a sign of the old wound’s reopening.
Something of Morning’s former robustness had spent itself, but he had
all the strength a man needs, and that light unconsciousness of the
flesh which is delightful to those who produce much from within. The
balance of his forces of development had turned from restoring his body
to a higher replenishment.

The mystery of work broke upon him more and more, and the thrall of
it; its relation to man at his best; the cleansing of a man’s daily
life for the improvement of his particular expression in the world’s
service; the ordering of his daily life in pure-mindedness, the power
of the will habitually turned to the achieving of this pure-mindedness.
He saw that man is only true and at peace when played upon from
the spiritual source of life; therefore, all that perfects a man’s
instrumentation is vital, and all that does not is destructive. Most
important of all, he perceived that a real worker has nothing whatever
to do beyond the daily need, with the result of his work in a worldly
way; that any deep relation to worldly results of a man’s work is
contamination.

He lost the habit and inclination to think what he wanted to say. He
listened. He became sceptical of all work that came from brain, in
the sense of having its origin in something he had actually learned.
He remembered how Fallows had spoken of this long ago; (he had not
listened truly enough to understand then); how a man’s brain is at his
best when used purely to receive--as a little finer instrument than the
typewriter.

Except for certain moments on the borderland of sleep, Betty Berry
was closest to him during his work. His every page was for her eye--a
beloved revelation of his flesh and mind and spirit. And the thing had
to be plain, plain, plain. That was the law.

How Fallows had fought for that. “Don’t forget the deepest down man,
John!”... Betty Berry and Fallows and Nevin were his angels--his cabin,
a place of continual outpouring to them. Few evils were powerful
enough to stem such a current, and penetrate the gladness of giving.

He slept lightly, and was on the verge again and again, almost nightly,
in fact, of surprising his own greater activity that does not sleep.
He often brought back just the murmur of these larger doings; and on
the borderlands he sometimes felt himself in the throb of that larger
consciousness which moves about its meditations and voyagings, saying
to the body, “Sleep on.” It was this larger consciousness that used
him as he used the typewriter, when he was writing at his best and his
listening was pure.... He had been held so long to the ruck that he
would never forget the parlance of the people--and not fall to writing
for visionaries.

... One night he dreamed he went to Betty Berry.... He was ascending
the stairs to her. She seemed smaller, frailer. Though he was a step
or two down, his eyes met hers equally. She was lovelier than anything
he had ever known or conceived in woman. Her smile was so wistful
and sweet and compassionate--that the hush and fervor of it seemed
everywhere in the world. There was a shyness in her lips and in the
turn of her head. Some soft single garment was about her--as if she had
come from a fountain in the evening.... And suddenly there was a great
tumult within him. He was lost in the battle of two selves--the man who
loved and destroyed, and the man who loved and sustained.

The greater love only asked her there--loved her there, exquisite,
apart, found in her a theme for infinite contemplation, as she stood
smiling.... The other was the love of David, when he looked across
the house-tops at Bathsheba, bathing, and made her a widow to mother
Solomon. This human love was strong in the dream, for he caught her in
his arms, and kissed, and would not let her go, until her voice at last
reached his understanding.

“_Oh, why did you spoil it all? Oh, why--when I thought it was safe
to come?_”

He had no words, but her message was not quite ended:

“_I should have come to you as before--and not this way--but you
seemed so strong and so pure.... It is my fault--all my fault._”

She was Betty Berry--but lovelier than all the earth--the spirit of
all his ideals in woman. The marvelous thing about it was that he knew
after the dream that this was the Betty Berry that would live in spite
of anything that could happen to the Betty Berry in the world. He knew
that she waited for him--for the greater lover, John Morning, whose
love did not destroy, but sustained.... She who regarded him in “the
hush of expectancy” from the distance of a night’s journey, and he
who labored here stoutly in the work of the world, were but names and
symbols of the real creatures above the illusion of time.... So he came
to love death--not with eagerness, but as an ideal consummation. Such
a result were impossible had he not faced death as an empty darkness
first, and overcome the fear of it.

These many preparations for real life on earth in the flesh he was to
put in his book--not his adventures, but the fruits of them--how he had
reached to-day, and its decent polarity in service. He had been hurled
like a top into the midst of men. After the seething of wild energy
and the wobblings, he had risen to a certain singing and aspiring
rhythm--the whir of harmony. He told the story in order, day by day.
Though it was done with the I’s, there was no self-exploitation.
John Morning was merely the test-tube, containing from time to time
different compounds of experience. And he did it plainly, plainly,
plainly, as is the writer’s business.

As he watched for Jethro, one morning early in June, he perceived
a second figure in the old rig. At the box, the stranger got out
and followed Jethro’s arm, directed up the hill toward the cabin,
disappeared for a moment in the swail-thicket by the fence, and
presently began the ascent, bringing Morning’s papers and letters....
The stranger was tall and tanned, wore a wide hat and approached with a
slim ease of movement. Morning knew he had seen him before, but could
not remember until the voice called:

“Hullo--that you, John Morning?”

It was Archibald Calvert, last met during the night-halt in Rosario,
Luzon, the correspondent who had ridden with Reever Kennard, and who
had lost _Mio Amigo_. He had always thought rather pleasantly of
Archibald Calvert when he thought at all.

“Say--what are you getting set for out here?”

“It’s better and cheaper than a hall-bedroom,” Morning answered.

“That sounds good.... Well, I spent all day yesterday looking for
you--first clue, Boabdil--second at Markheim’s from a little red-haired
girl.... The rural man picked me up----”

“I’ve got some cold buttermilk----”

“Pure asceticism--also a pearl of an idea----”

They sat down together.

“So you made ten thousand dollars out of Liaoyang after you came
back.... I looked up the story. It was--say, it was a bride, Morning!”

“Thanks. Duke Fallows did a better one in one-tenth the space. The
pay-end didn’t mean much. I’m not a good bed for money culture. Tell me
where you’ve been, Mr. Calvert.”

“Oh, I’ve been around. Didn’t get up to the Russ-Jap stuff. I was down
among the Pacific Islands. You know I’m a better tramp than writer.
It’s five years since I hit New York.... They say old Reever Kennard is
doing politics. He’ll be back from Washington to-night----”

“Politics, and an occasional dramatic criticism,” said Morning.

“You know that never sat easy--that day in Rosario----”

“Didn’t it?”

“I was down to Batangas three days later--unpacking saddle-bags, and
found _Mio Amigo_ No. 1. Deeper down I found its mate.... They’re
common in Luzon as old Barlow knives when we were kids.... I made a
scene about that knife--with my own deep down in my own duffel.... I
suppose you’ve forgotten.”

“No--I haven’t.”

“You were pretty decent about it. It was a nasty thing--even to
speak about it as I did. You see, the inscription rather appealed to
kid-intelligence in my case, and I thought it was unique, instead of
the popular idea of a cheap Filipino knife.”

“Kennard took it seriously, didn’t he?” said Morning.

“You mean at the time?... Yes, I couldn’t understand that exactly.”

Morning decided not to speak of that day’s relation to Tokyo five years
later.

“Well,” said Calvert, after a pause, “I hunted you up to say I was an
ass, and to give you back your knife. The pair have been smelling up my
things around the world for a long time.”

Morning grasped it eagerly.

Some time afterward, when Calvert arose to go, Morning ventured this
much:

“And so you’re going to see Reever Kennard?”

“Yes, to-night.... I suppose you two and the others game together from
time to time?”

“The fact is, New York isn’t very good anchorage for that sort of
thing,” Morning said.

“... I was glad when they told me you had put over that big Liaoyang
stuff, Morning----”

Morning smiled and took the quick brown hand of the other. Calvert
appealed to him, but it couldn’t be shown in any way. Calvert was like
a good horse, gladly giving evidence of fine feeling, but embarrassed
when made much of.... He went away blithely--off, for God knows
where--but fearlessly on his way.

Morning held the little knife in his hand.

He thought of that hard Philippine service which had seemed so big
at the time; of that day when he watched the fat shoulders of Reever
Kennard in the forward sets of horse, Kennard seeming all that
greatness can be. He thought of the halt in Rosario, of the lame woman.
He looked at the little knife again.... He had not really wanted it
then, and yet it had cut the strings of his Fates, turning them loose
upon him. It had knocked him out of the second Japanese column five
years afterward, and given him instead Duke Fallows and Liaoyang. It
had given him that great battle, Lowenkampf, the Ploughman, Eve, the
sorrel mare--the journey to Koupangtse--the blanket at Tongu--the
deck-passage--the _Sickles_, Ferry--and Nevin--even Noyes and
Field.

It had given him the Armory, and Betty Berry.

He held it fast.

It had given him money, fame, and New York for a day--the opinion
from Kennard that killed the first writing of _Compassion_--the
mood to see Charley and his sister at the switch-board, which brought
him to Betty Berry again.... Out of these had come all that was real
and true of this hour. It had given him the slums and the leper
conflict--Nevin’s cure and the fasting--the real Ploughman--the better
_Compassion_--the cabin in which he sat, his place of Initiation.
It had given him the triumph over death--the illumination of love and
labor--the listening life of the soul, and the vision of its superb
immortality.

He held it fast and looked hard at the little friend. The brass handle
sent up a smell of verdi-gris from his hot hand.


                                   3

THIS was John Morning’s splendid summer. He was up often at
two or three in the morning. Thoughts and sentences of yesterday,
now cleared and improved, thronged his mind, as he made coffee. He
learned that a man may write the first half of a book, but be used as
a mere slave of the last half. And yet, to be the instrument of a rush
of life and ideas, the latter becoming every hour more coherent and
effective, was a privilege to make a man sing. And to increase, at the
same time, in the realization of the courage and tenderness and faith
of a woman who waited; to feel the power of her in the work; to work
for her; to put his love for her in the work, all the strength of her
attraction--this was living the life of depth and fullness.

Times when he looked out of the doorway, and the elms were shaping
against the flowery purple of daybreak, and the robin beginning
thirstily--his eyes smarted with tears at the beauty of it all, the
privilege of work, and the absolute rightness of the whole creation,
in which a man can’t possibly lose, after he has heard his real self
speak. He loved life and death in such moments, and knew there was a
Betty Berry in the waiting studio, and another over the Crossing. (Had
he not glimpsed her in his dream at the top of the stairway?)

So his book prospered, enfolding the common man. It had something
for every man who had not come so far as he. He was _of_ them,
in every understanding among them, different only in that it was his
business to write by the way. His old failures furnished the studies of
distintegrating forces. Personally, he was detached from them, as his
writing showed, except for an intellectual familiarity--as detached as
from the worn clothing he had left here and there around the world. One
by one, the constructive and destructive principles of the average man
were shown divided against each other in the arena of mind--and how the
friends and loves had come to the balance. Nevin was in the fabric, the
little Englishman at Tongu, Fallows and the Woman--not in name, (there
was no name but John Morning’s), but they were all there, lifting and
laughing and drawing, as friends and loves do in the life of a man.
Again and again he cried out that the peace and sweet reason of things
he had found was of their bringing--that without them he would have
been lost again and again by the way.

... The Summer days passed magically. Markheim was beginning to talk
rehearsals. He had found the right man to play the Ploughman....
Late-September. The letters from Betty Berry were rarer, thinner.
They troubled him.... One morning he watched Jethro’s rig approach--a
golden morning, and the cattle were feeding down in the meadow. He had
seen the picture a thousand times--the cattle on the slope--yet it was
never so real to him, nor had he hungered for the face of Betty Berry
as now.... Jethro stopped at his box, and he hurried down. There was a
letter from her--and one from Russia, too. The first did not free his
mind from sorrow--though the effort was plain to do this very thing....
The letter from Fallows filled the day:

“... I knew, John, if I sat down to write, it would set free all my
longing to go back to you. So I have put it off from week to week....
From the _Western States_ I followed our old trail to Tokyo, then
via Peking, to Shanhaikwan, Koupangtse, Liaoyang.... I stopped there,
and went around by the coal-fields, where the millet had been planted
all over again. I talked over the battle with the Japanese. They are
just as interested as ever in what the other man knows. Though the
big battle seemed like another life to me, it was their immediate
yesterday. They would do it all over again. The Ploughman seemed to
walk with me; the rest was boyish babble.... I found Lowenkampf--white
and quiet--but the woman loves him, if Russia does not. The little boy
is a man-soul. That’s the story--except that he sent his love to you.
The three are off to South America, and all is well.... Up in the Bosk
hills, I followed the Summer. The old man is gone. He had his sausages
at the last....

“I was needed, but the little farm was all right. The neighbor had
done his part. There was enough for all.... How simple, one little
vanity of a man such as I am, and this family has enough and to spare;
food and firelight, good-will, their hope of heaven brought down to
comprehension again--all for so little, John. If men only knew the joy
of it--how it lasts and augments, how it sustains the man who does
it--to weave a mesh of happiness for the poor. The fact is, he has to
watch very carefully, or he’ll get caught in the mesh himself.

“The little boy came running to meet me. I think he ran to meet me
somewhere before. He is different from all the others--except for that
touch of the old mother which he has, and that something about the
Ploughman. He was white and all eyes when I picked him up. They said
he wasn’t well, but in three days he was sound again--color breaking
through. To think that my coming could do that for any living soul--I.

“The old Mother.... She was just waiting for me--lingering until I
came--watching down the road in the sunlight. We talked a little. She
spoke softly of her soldier-son. It was only a few days.... It all
came from her, John--the battle of Liaoyang so far as its meaning to
me. She was the light on the Ploughman’s brow that made a different
man of me. He never dreamed of messages to the world of men, nor the
passion to serve men--but he had his mother’s faith and something of
her vision. That made him different from other Russian soldiers, so
that I could see. The little boy Jan will bring it to life again. Your
play goes straight back to her. There’s everlasting quality in being a
mother like that. I think it was the fourth morning--that I suddenly
began to listen attentively to what she was saying. It was about us
all--intimately about her soldier-son.... The younger mother came
in--her sad, weary face different.... She went out, and returned with
her shoes on.... Suddenly I knew that the old sweet flower was passing.
Why, she was gone before I knew it--smiling up at the saints from my
arms.... I heard the little boy coming quickly--knew his step as I
would know yours, John. I seemed to wait for his hand upon the door.
I saw him, and he saw us--came forward on tip-toe, and we were all
together----”

Morning didn’t read the rest just then. It seemed one of the finest
things he had ever known--Duke Fallows preserving the old mother and
the others in their conviction that he was just a peasant like the
Ploughman.


                                   4

FROM that April night after Morning left, when Helen Quiston
found her wandering in the halls, and asking in a childish way to be
taken to the ’cello (saying that her father had hidden it from her in
a strange place), until now in mid-September, Betty Berry had not left
the studio-apartment. The real break-down had begun a month before
the high day in which Morning came; perhaps on the very night his
Guardian had called. She had scarcely played or practiced since then;
she read nothing, talked to no one except Helen. Morning had noted her
anxiously early on the day of his call at the studio, but such power
had come in the flashes of those hours, and so high was she enthroned
and illumined in his own mind at the end, (in which she had kept to the
darkness), that he had not realized the blight that had touched her
life.

Helen Quiston had long loved the woman. She knew much that the Doctor
did not. It was she who read the letters which in certain moments of
the day Betty hastily penned. It was as if for a moment in a long
gray day, a ray of watery sunlight broke through the cloud-banks. In
the momentary shining of her mind, Betty would write to Morning. Many
of the letters were impossible. Certain of these letters would have
brought the lover by the first train. Even Betty had a sense of this
and relied upon the music-teacher. Here and there among the notes, too,
was a wisp of the old sweet spirit. It was a wonderful conception to
Helen Quiston: that all but these had gone to replenish the creative
fire of a lover who knew well what his lady had given, but not what it
meant to her. Just as surely as the Hindoo woman offers herself upon
the funeral pyre with the body of her mate, Betty Berry had given her
spirit to the living. A hundred times the singing teacher had heard
these words from white lips that smiled:

“_We are one--a deathless, world-loving one!_”

And often she heard this queer verse from the Persian:

  “_Four eyes met. There were changes in two souls.
  And now I cannot remember whether he is a man and I a woman,
  Or he a woman and I a man. All I know is,
  There were two: Love came, and there is one...._”

“Don’t forget to remind me that I must tell him I am happy,” Betty
would say.... When a letter was finally finished and sealed, she
would lean back, shutting her eyes with a sigh, saying: “Now read me
his that came to-day and yesterday.”... And afterward: “Isn’t it
wonderful, Helen, dear? Isn’t it quite wonderful? You are so dear to
understand.”

“Self-destruction is the first danger,” the Doctor had said in
the early days. “That’s why she should be in a sanatorium under
professional vigilance. Each case is individual. She might take a
sudden dislike to the saintliest of nurses--even to you. The fever
will not last, but it is a long battle. Shock, overwork, a terrible
disappointment--such are the causes. Singular sweetness of disposition,
as in this case, is very rare. The thing that goes with this usually is
‘the frozen stare’--hours motionless, looking at the wall----”

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning’s letters were like white-hot fragments from his forge--roughly
fashioned, but still seething with force. Helen Quiston felt that
there was a splendid singing in that forge; that a man’s voice attuned
with God and the world was raised in the morning; that silence drew on
as the concentration of the task deepened; that there was singing in
the evening again. Aliment for the soul of the music teacher, these
letters. She would have fought to obey Betty Berry against the will of
the Doctor and nurse had it been necessary.

One of these September-morning letters was particularly joyous with
enthusiasm for Betty Berry’s gift to him. He told again how it wove
into, beautified and energized his work.

“Literally I thank the stars for you,” Helen Quiston read. “Sometimes
it comes to me--as if straight from you--strength that I feel with my
limbs, strength that means health. It surges through my veins like
magic--so that my eyes smart with tears. I speak your name again and
again in thankfulness for love fresh every day, and for the pity for
men in my heart----”

Betty was not following. It was frequently so in the first reading.

“Free,” she repeated softly, from a thought of yesterday’s letter. “He
said I was free. He said I never explained----”

“Yes, dear, he was writing of that night he came to the theatre. I’ll
get the letter for you to-night. He said that you belonged to the risen
world, the woman’s world--that you trusted your vision--did not seek
to explain, but rejoiced. He said you had no guile, that you asked
nothing, and were unafraid. He means to give the world a portrait of
the risen woman--a portrait of you.”

Betty Berry did not answer. Mention of that night at the theatre
invariably affected her to silence.

“I must hurry away for a little while, but I will finish this,” Helen
added, reading on:

“In the evenings, the greater power of you comes over my life like a
spiritual rain. I remember the art of your hands, the sweet mystery of
your lips; the tenderness of your eyes and words; but over it all--the
inner power of you, strong as truth, pure as truth, wise as the East,
and sweet as the South. It is the spirit of you that has come to
me--your singing, winging, feminine spirit. It has made me whole....
Do you know, I used to think the world would be made better by force,
by arraignment, by revelation of evil. You have shown me the better
way of making the world better by loving it. That’s woman’s way, the
Christ’s way.... And when I think that you have given me this blessed
thing, this finest fruit of earth--your love, created out of trial and
loneliness, your love, so pure and true and valorous--when I think
that it is mine, and how you fought through the long day to give me
this, _and only this_--when I think of the splendor of that day’s
work of yours, I kneel to you, and to the spirit of the world--in the
wood, in the hut, before the door, under my elms, under the stars,--I
kneel to you and the Source of you. The peace that comes, and the
power--this, is my passionate wish for you! I would restore it to you
magnified.”

Helen Quiston read all this a second time that September morning,
although her pupils were waiting.... It was to her like the song from a
strong man’s house.

“You are rich and elect, Betty!” she cried. “You have been a woman and
_wanted_ love. You have finished your work at night, alone, and
realized that there was no one--your arms tired, your throat tired,
your brain and soul tired and heart-lonely--and there was no one. How
rich you are now! I think a woman is rich who can say: ‘In London or
Tokyo or New South Wales there is one who loves me--who may be thinking
at this moment about me--who wishes I were there, or he were here;
whose heart’s warmth stretches across the distance and makes the world
a home, because he is in the world.... It would seem to me that I
should be exultant to-day--if there was such a one for me. It seems--if
I could see him in a year, even if I could not see him at all, _and
he were somewhere_--I should be all new and radiant, born again....
But you, Betty dear--oh, think what you have--what you are giving!”

Betty’s eyes were shut. There was a gray line around the faint color of
the lips, and she was pale as a candle-flame in the morning sun.

“I wish you could stay with me, dearest,” she whispered. “It is too
much for me--when I am alone. But when you are here, what you say and
what you see--makes me believe.... And you must tell me what to write
in answer to this--to satisfy him. I shall hold it in my hand, and
rest----”

“I’ll come back this afternoon. We’ll have supper, and the letter will
be mailed. You’ll know what to say then----”

She hurried away, lest her heart break. The tired, emotionless
voice trailed after her. And all day she heard Betty’s voice among
the unfinished voices, and saw the spiritless clay of her heart’s
friend sitting in deathly labor below, tormented by the phantom of a
will--like a once glorious empire become desolate, a foolish scion upon
the throne.


                                   5

HELEN QUISTON was the brain of the studio, the eyes and fingers--even,
in part, the spirit of the place that John Morning loved. It was a
letter of hers that John Morning answered with this paragraph:

“I shut my eyes after the first reading--and it seemed to me I went
sailing. There were many voyagers and many islands--but I found _my
Island_. It called to me and I knew it was for me. The voyagers
sailed on past the curving inlets and the arrowed points--but I sailed
home. I found the fountains, the crags, the echoes, the virgin springs,
the mysterious meeting places of the land and sea, the enchanted forest
where the fairies are--and the sun was rising. It was thus I answered
the calling mystery of your spirit....”

She was glad that his mind turned to the actual memory picture of Betty
Berry, as he finished:

“I do love the woman that moves about the world, the woman others
see--the lips that tremble, the eyes that fill with tears so swiftly
over some loveliness, and so rarely over her own sorrow; the
instant-enfolding mind, the listening and the vitality--but it seems
that I love in a greater way the heart that called to its lover without
words--who fared forth to meet her lover and gave her soul.”

More and more Helen Quiston perceived that John Morning was becoming
sufficient unto himself--the larger lover, loving the world through
his lady, and needing less, even in thought, her hands and kisses and
emotions. She saw steadily that which Duke Fallows had made Betty
Berry see for a night. She did not see it as clearly as Betty Berry saw
it that night, but she beheld an enduring radiance from it, because
her body was not in the wreck of sacrifice. She had a woman’s sense of
the large relation of things, and a woman’s faith. The misery of life
as she had met it, the disorder, monotony, and gray sorrow of it all,
was her profound assurance of another and brilliant side to the shield.
She wanted nothing for herself in these particular instances. For Betty
Berry she saw a swift transfer to a certain indefinite perfection, no
less attractive because it was unlimned in her mind. Her own happiness,
her great privilege, was to be third in this miracle of a man and woman
passing beyond in a truly royal way. There was a mystic quality that
suited her mind in the coming of the Guardian to Betty Berry’s room,
and in the fact that John Morning would never know of this. It was
like the coming of some Michael or Gabriel. From what she knew of John
Morning’s work, she could believe in the planetary promise that the
Guardian seemed to see; indeed, she could have believed in it with less
evidence, because the Guardian said so.... Her particular dream was for
the man to appear who would make women see what it was in their hands
and hearts to do for the coming race. She dreamed of a man to come with
words to women that would be reflected upon the brows of children to
be, that would help to fashion the latent dreams into great children.
She believed it was the agony of being childless that put this dream
into her own mind, and she believed that the world-ignition could only
come from a man who knew the same agony.... So she listened raptly to
the singing from the forge; and more and more, with almost unspeakable
excitement, she realized that the voice of John Morning was slowly and
surely taking to itself the authority and harmony which his Guardian
had promised.

He wrote often now of the rehearsals of _Compassion_, of his
large fears and small satisfactions in them. He was always glad to
get back to the cabin and the Book.... That book--some of her own
inner life would be in it. She had given in the letters everything she
dared. Her tears were all shed; there was dry burning in her eyes,
for what Betty Berry had given to that Book.... Now in mid-September
it was done, all but a month’s chiseling and polishing. It would
be given to the publisher two weeks before the first appearance of
_Compassion_ at the _Markheim_ the first week in November....
She dared not think what would happen when the Book was done, and the
destiny of the play established.... A letter from Morning at this time
contained for Helen Quiston one winged, triumphant sentence. She was
reading aloud to Betty Berry:

“It was straight, clean going, right to the end of the book.... It
is hard-held. It is kind. It laughs. It goes after the deepest-down
man.... You have to reach almost self-effacement to associate with fine
ideas and to get to the front in service.... How hard it was to make me
see that the real world is not over there among writers and publishers
and drama-producers, but everywhere among the hearts of the poor!

“And, oh, Betty Berry, it isn’t the book--it’s the life that counts.
You have made me live. You earned your strength alone--suffering alone
through the years. That’s the highest honor that can come to man or
woman in this world--to be chosen for such years as you have known. It
comes only to the strong--the strength to stand alone. The world bows
sooner or later before such character. Men feel it, though their eyes
be shut.

“There is a certain excellence in the honor of standing alone. Alone,
man or woman is either ahead or behind the crowd. In the latter case,
he is imbecile or defective, and God is with him.... God is in the
forward solitudes, too. What a splendor about standing in the full
light! The crowd cannot get it. The crowd keeps the light from itself.
There the maiming is, the suffering, the cruelty; there the light is
divided, and the warmth is the low heat of men, not the grand primal
vitality of the Sun. There in the crowd, Apparition and Appearance take
the place of the Real.... Now and then, in the torturing passage of the
crowd, the landmark of some pioneer is reached, and the cry goes up,
‘We are on the right road, for that man passed here!’ The name of the
pioneer becomes part of the crowd’s impedimenta. Perhaps he smiles from
the Other Side, not because the crowd has found _his_ trail--he
may have wanted that once, though not long--but looking back upon his
greater birth, he smiles--the place where he emerged and stood alone on
the grand frontier.... You have made me strong enough to believe that
you and I may go away up into the coolness beyond the senses--even in
this life----”

Helen Quiston stopped. That last was the final sanction. The Guardian
knew, when he chose John Morning. It was the one thought she had hardly
dared formulate for him, and which she had awaited ardently during the
late weeks.

“He means that a woman can go, too!” she cried, trembling, forgetful
even of Betty Berry; “he is on the path--higher, higher--and yet, he
says that women, too, can go that way alone----”

Betty Berry frowned. “What does he mean by going alone--about a man and
a woman going alone?” She was suffering to understand, angry that the
other understood.

“He says that the woman may also go alone to that Eminence! No man--no
human man--has ever said that before. Men think of _men passing_
upward. People caught in their desires have forever lied to themselves,
trying to believe that man and woman can go _together_.... He says
here----” her eye darted on to read:

“‘Men and women gain their strength to reach that Eminence by being
alone--by loving alone!’ You taught him that.... Don’t you see,
dearest, it is the beginning of his real message? You gave it to
him--and what a message it is for you and for--even for me----”

“But woman is the serpent,” Betty Berry muttered.

Helen arose to turn on a wall light. Her hand fumbled. Her eyes could
not be brought down from that lofty plateau. A strange peace had come
into the loneliness of her life. She wanted to tell it everywhere--to
Nuns of the World.... It had been a man’s world so long--that this
thought had never come. Always in the world’s thought and art--the
flesh of woman had kept her down in the dusks and valleys. Sons
climbed; lovers left their maids to climb ... but only the Gods knew
all the time _that daughters could go_.

Betty was silent. It had become the habit of her life not to speak when
the mists thickened.... The picture of Dante and Beatrice was in the
light. Helen pointed to it:

“Who would think of saying that Beatrice, who was the Way--did not
share the vision and the consciousness?” she asked softly.

Betty shut her eyes. The other returned with eager love and sat down
at her knees. “And now I will read the last. Just think how clearly he
sees:

“‘The world is so dear to me because of you. I am so freshly conscious
of its roundness, of the profile of its coasts as seen from above; of
its light and darkness, the sharpness of sun in the retreating gray,
of its skies and its peaks, the last to darken and the first to answer
the morn.... I put the candle away just now, and in the darkness I saw
the Earth from above--not from afar, but from some space nearer than
the moon. I saw it all at once. The moon shining upon one side, the
sun shining upon the other--a golden side, a silver side.... And I saw
you afterward--not as you are in the studio, but as a shadowed, quiet
figure among moonlit ruins. You were calm, and moved silently here and
there. Ruins were about you, yet you seemed to know the things to do.’
What does it mean?”

“What does it mean, Helen?” Betty repeated.

The other’s eyes filled with tears. The question might have come from a
little old lady of eighty, whose house of life was locked, all but the
sitting-room.

“It’s just a dream, dear,” she whispered.

“There are no ruins about me--when you are here,” Betty said.

“Ruins, dearest?... No, gardens and living temples----”

Betty arose, and moved slowly up and down the studio, then stood by
her chair. The impulse even to lift her hand was unusual. She moved
now with difficulty, but was not conscious of it. The room was dark,
except for the one wall-light. Helen went to her side, helped her at
last to the chair. Betty’s face was deathly, but there was a mournful
reasonableness in her eyes, a faint grasp of actuality, that the other
had not seen for weeks. The old enemies, memory and hope, were in
feeble conflict.

“Do you think he means that I am not well?”

“He was only expressing a dream-picture.... I’m sure he hasn’t
interpreted it----”

“But he will. That comes afterward----”

       *       *       *       *       *

Betty was either better or worse.... The Doctor came. As he was
leaving, Helen walked to the stairs with him.

“Yes, there is a change,” he said.

“You think it is good?”

“Yes.... It’s been nearly six months. Yes, I think it is good. She
would have been dead without you, Miss Quiston. I don’t know what you
do--but you keep her from the engrossing mania.”

“She has some strength, Doctor?”

“It is all a matter of will at this stage. All along we have battled to
keep her somehow nourished.”

Helen went back to the studio. Betty was on her feet again. The nurse
was at hand, but she had never been able to involve herself in the
patient’s understanding. She left the room now, anticipating the
inevitable request.

“Do you think, Helen--that as he finishes his work--more and more--the
ruins will come back to mind?”


                                   6

THE Summer was done; the book had been ten days out of Morning’s
hand; the final rehearsals were engrossing and painful, and the
letters from the hill-cabin, though buoyant, were not so frequent....
Service for men--service for men! The words seemed integrated into
the life of the man. There was something herculean in his striving.
The long Summer had ripened the harvest. Conceptions which had been
vague and dreamy in the first letters were ready at his hand now,
daily expressions of his work. Helen Quiston, so long dream-fed,
trembled at the thought that she had something to do with a giant’s
making.

It never occurred to her that the things so real in her mind were at
least an age distant from the interests of the world. She did not stop
to think that the drama so vital and amazing to her would be out of
the comprehension even of the decent doctor who came to the studio day
after day. Not once did it enter her mind that the world would regard
her as heartless and fanatic for her strength in so ruthlessly holding
her closest friend to the sacrifice. Her problem now was what to do
with John Morning after the first night of the play, and the report
upon his book was in. She was afraid he would come. He would see Betty
Berry--see what her giving had done. He would learn that it was she,
Helen Quiston, who had given him the peace in which to find the larger
consciousness; her letters, in Betty Berry’s hand, that had filled the
distances with peace for him.

She had no thought for John Morning except as an instrument. It was
something the way Duke Fallows had thought of him at the last. Either
one would have sacrificed themselves, but they were not called. Only
Betty Berry loved him for himself, and to her was the altar. They loved
him for the future, and guarded him as the worker-bees guard the queen
because she is potentially the coming race.

And this was the miracle: John Morning at his work had passed the need
of the kiss of woman. He had been tided over the grand crossing by the
love of Betty Berry. Receiving it now, he did not hold it for himself,
but gave it forth in service to men.... There was something cosmic
about this to Helen Quiston.

       *       *       *       *       *

Breathless expectancy in the studio on the early November evening
of _Compassion’s_ first performance at the _Markheim_. Though nothing
of the sort had been arranged, Helen Quiston expected a telegram
after the Play. It was not yet cold, but an east wind had been rising
since dark, and there was tension in the sounds and shaking everywhere.
Betty had, for her, a very keen sense of the importance of the night
to the man in New York.

“I feel as if I had lived, Betty,” her friend whispered. “Oh, what must
it be to you?”

“I feel that I have died,” the other murmured.

Though she rested better and accepted food with less reluctance, (the
doctor declaring himself satisfied with the progress of the past six
weeks), it had been the hardest period for Helen Quiston. Something
was in Betty’s mind that was not confided. Often in the evening she
showed a preference for being alone. Helen feared for a time that the
other might write a letter without her supervision, but as there was
no change in the tenor of Morning’s replies, the outpouring of his
thankfulness in no way diminished, the only conclusion was that Betty
at least had not mailed such a one. She had taken sudden dislikes to
several different nurses in turn. When she wanted anything there was a
terrible concentration about it. Helen and the doctor and all concerned
were drawn into the vortex.

“It’s the way she used to practice,” her friend said.

“Miss Quiston----” began the doctor.

“Yes.”

“Oh, it doesn’t matter. I was just thinking--are you so real to all
your friends?”

“I have no friend like Betty.”

“That eases my mind.”

“Why?”

“A few friends like that and there wouldn’t be any singing teacher.”

Helen Quiston realized fully for the first time that the doctor was
exactly a human being, having the various features of the species.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were startled by a crash in the inner room. The nurse entered
quickly to announce that a flower-pot containing a fuchsia had fallen
from the window-sill.

“The plant is in ruins,” she said.

Betty rose immediately. _Ruins_--the word was a fiery stimulant
to her. In a few moments she ceased her pacing, saying that she was
utterly weary. Helen, though leaving for the room she occupied, a
flight above, could but remark upon the gleaming intensity of Betty’s
eyes, and the restless leaping of her hands....

The nurse came to her. Betty went with her into the inner room. In the
next fifteen minutes, the patient was more or less alone, while the
studio couch, upon which the nurse was accustomed to rest, was being
prepared. Unwatched, her movements quickened, a queer, furtive smile
played upon her lips, and certain actions altogether uncommon occupied
her concentrated attention. The key was quietly removed from the door
between the studio and the living-room; a large bundle was carried
from a closet-shelf to the rear window and tossed out. From behind
the books in a small case near the reading-lamp a purse was produced;
and finally, when the nurse was at the farthest end of the studio,
Betty drew a large, sharp knife from the same hiding-place, and with
astonishing quiet and force severed the telephone wires just beneath
the bell-box, fastened to the wall close to the floor. The knife was
returned to its hiding-place. The nurse joined her, and Betty, at the
studio door, suddenly sank into a chair with a cry of exhaustion. The
other ran to her.

“It is nothing! Bring some water----”

The nurse had not reached the medicine-case in the bath, when the
patient sprang up and locked the intervening door of the apartment,
leaving the woman inside with a “dead” telephone.

For the first time in half a year, Betty left the studio, carefully
closing the main door. Out the back way, she found her parcel, and in
the windy darkness put on the rain-coat, traveling hat, veil, gloves
and shoes it had contained, departing breathlessly through the alley
gate.

For a long time the hammering upon floors and walls could not
be located in the studio-building. The outer floor of Betty’s
apartment was tried, but found locked; and since there was no
response to the bell, nothing came of the offerings of the earlier
Samaritans. Much time was occupied by the nurse in trying to call the
telephone-exchange. A stranger in the street was finally persuaded,
from the upper window, to find the janitor of the building and send him
to the Quiston studio. Master keys set the nurse free.

Helen Quiston first notified the Doctor, who came hastily. The story
of the nurse was explicit as a hospital report.

“Is your car here, Doctor?” Miss Quiston asked presently.

“Yes.”

“Will you take me down-town? I’ll be ready in a moment.”

“Gladly.”

The Doctor was informed in a tense but controlled voice that the
patient was doubtless at this moment upon a certain east-bound train.
“Betty left here a few minutes after nine,” Helen added. “The train I’m
thinking of left at ten-five. It is now eleven.... Oh, I wonder what
she had on? She was dressed when I left her--shirt-waist, black skirt,
house-slippers----”

Five minutes’ search and thinking on the part of Miss Quiston uncovered
the fact that Betty’s rain-coat and a certain small traveling hat were
missing.... Nothing was positively established at the station.

“I must send a telegram, Doctor,” Helen said.

It was to Morning at his rural-delivery address. Her heart sank with
fear lest the message fail to reach him, until it was finally handled
by the post-office.

“There’s nothing further to do,” she said hopelessly.

Night brought no news, nor the early morning. At nine-thirty o’clock,
Helen Quiston was leaving the studio for the morning’s work, when
she heard a light, swift step on the stairs--someone coming up at
least three steps at a time. The hall-door was half-swung. Helen
stood waiting.... Now a stranger was at the doorway, hesitating, yet
expectant. His brow was tanned, as if he had walked bare-headed in the
sun. His gray eyes were remarkably clear and very kind. For a second or
two they stood face to face, forgetting to speak.

“Where is Betty Berry?” It was a demand, yet gently spoken.

“Are you--are you John Morning?” “Yes.... Where is she?”

“I think she has gone to you--I do not know, but I think she has gone
to the hill-cabin----”

“Are you her friend?”

“Yes--I am Miss Quiston.”

“When did she go?”

“Last night. I telegraphed you----”

He came close to her. His hand upon her shoulder drew her to a chair,
and he brought another near. “I will not stop to ask questions,” he
said heavily. “You tell me all----”

“What of the play?”

“I don’t know--I left before it was done to come here.... She is
ill--go on----”

The story faltered at first, but the gray eyes steadied her. Toward the
end she talked swiftly, coherently. She winged over the one certain
cause of Betty’s illness.... When she stopped, it seemed to her that
some mighty machinery was whirring below, its vibrations in the floor
and walls.

He arose, stood beside her--all the light and reason gone from his
face. For several seconds he stood there, his left hand swiftly tapping
her shoulder. The powers of the man were afar--miles away upon his
hill. This was just a tapping blind man in the room....

“I must go. I have no words now.... She is there. It must be nearly ten
now. I must hurry to her.”

The engines in the house flagged and were silent.

The woman stood where he had left her, smiling.


                                   7

BETTY held her purse tightly in her hand, and certain thoughts
were held as tightly in her brain, as she pressed against the wind....
It was something like going to a distant concert engagement in the
night.... Her limbs were uncertain, and there was a constant winging
in her breast, as though it were the cage of a frantic bird. She did
not mind. She could forget it--if only her eyes remained true. For the
first time in months she was on her own strength, her own will. There
was a sharp distress in the responsibility, but also an awakening of
force.

The wind whipped her breath away, yet she liked the wild freedom of
it--if only she could continue to see and remember what to say. The
studio was a hideous blackness that drove her from behind. This was a
new and consuming hatred. The two squares to the large uptown hotel
where a cab was readily obtainable were long as a winter night; and
the tension to remember seemed destroying her by the time she found a
driver. She told him the station and the train.

“Plenty of time, Ma’am,” he said.

Her eyes filled with tears. It was true, then, that there was such a
station, such a train, that there was time, and nothing had betrayed
her. “I must not speak; I must not speak,” kept warning in her mind;
“but he is so good to me!”

Now she felt the cold, as she rested a moment before the new ordeal at
the station--destination, tickets, the Pullman, not to fall, not to
speak any but the exact words.... The driver helped her out. Everything
was familiar, but miraculously large.... She gave the man extra money,
and the faintest, humblest “Thank you!” escaped her. He whistled a
porter for her.

“The ticket window,” she said. And now she need only follow. It was
warmer. It would be warm in the Pullman.... She took the young colored
man’s arm. He turned with good nature.

“I have been ill,” she said. It was frightened from her lips.

“There is plenty of time, Miss. I’ll see you through to the berth--the
ten-five--yes’m.”

The quick tears started again, and an aching lump in her throat. She
wanted to cry out her thankfulness. She wanted to be told again and
again--that all this was not a dream, from which she would awaken
in that place of death. The value of her veil awed her; and it was
_she_ who had thought of it. Could it really be true that she had
forgotten nothing? Would she actually arrive at her journey’s end?

The porter procured berth and tickets, and now he assured her that her
train was ready. She followed him through interminable distances, down
countless stairs; she watched and listened critically, as he delivered
both tickets to the Pullman conductor. All she had to do was to follow,
to say nothing and to pay. With what thankfulness did she pay; and with
what warming courtesy were her gifts received. Surely the world was
changed. It had become so dear and good.... She had a far-off vision of
a peremptory Betty Berry of another world, striding to and fro among
men and trains and cities, giving her commands, expecting obedience,
conferring gratuities according to rigid principle.

The car-porter was more wonderful than any--an old Southern darkey,
with little patches of gray beard, absurdly distributed. A homing
gentleness was in his voice, and his smile was from a better world....
There had been another porter like him somewhere.

“She goes clear through,” the station porter said, “and she’s been
sick.”

“Ah’ll see the young Miss clar’ through,” the old man drawled. “Just
depen’ on me, Miss. Sit right down here--berth’ll be ready right smaht.”

She did not sleep, but she was warm and not uncomfortable. She dared
think a little of the end of the journey, but there was so much to do
in the morning, so much to keep in mind. She held fast to her purse.
In her dependence, the magic of it was like a strange discovery. In
the early morning, the porter brought her coffee with some hot milk and
toast. The wind had long since been left behind, but a cold rain was
falling. She would be cold. The terminal was reached. The old man bore
her forth. There was something merciful and restoring in his gentle
gratitude. A station porter led her to the Hackensack car.

She thought of breakfast on the way, but forgot it again upon reaching
Hackensack, where she was directed to the post-office.

She wrote the address of John Morning and asked shiveringly at the
stamp window if there was any way in which she could be delivered there.

The clerk could not see if she were laughing under the veil.

“The rural carrier knows the way,” she added. “I’d be willing to pay
well--”

The clerk craned his head back through the office, and called:

“Jethro!”

A large, dusty man came forward with the air of having just
breakfasted. He took the slip containing the address from her hand.

“The lady wants to go with you, Jethro----”

The rural carrier tilted his spectacles benignly to regard her.

“Bless me--ever been there?”

“No--but letters go safely----”

“I rather think they do--since I take ’em. Is this your writing?”

The place was darkening, suffocating to her. “Yes ... if you would only
take me. Five, ten dollars--oh, I should be so glad to pay anything I
have----”

The carrier penetrated the veil.

“Just sit down by the heater, Lady,” he said in a lowered tone. “We’ll
get there, and it won’t cost you five or ten dollars, neither. I know
where you want to go, and I know who you are, if I’m not mistaken.
Lizzie and I will get you there----”

She turned quickly, for the tears were coming.... Could it really be
that she had remembered everything? Was she really going to him, and
this the last stage of the journey? The heart of the large, dusty man
had radiated so suddenly upon her. She was not afraid of him, but she
must not faint nor speak until she was away from the others. Very still
she sat by the heater, praying for strength, praying that it was not
all a dream....

“Miss Betty Berry!”

There was an instant in which the call had but a vague meaning; then
shot home to her the hideous fear of being taken back. She was close to
screaming, yet it was only the rural-carrier coming.

“Yes?” she said, clearing her throat.

“I thought I couldn’t be wrong,” he said. “I’ve brought a good many
letters addressed to you back to town from the place you’re going, and
carried a good many out yonder in this writing of yours.... Lizzie and
me are ready, Miss.”

As they stepped out the rear door, he touched her arm reflectively,
and re-entered to bring a hairy black robe. The vehicle, of a vanished
type, was gray even in the rain, and cocked to one side from the
sagging of years, where the carrier sat. Betty’s weight did not
visibly impress the high side. He tucked the hairy robe about her, the
mail-bags at her feet, picked up the lines, and lo! they moved.

“Lizzie ain’t very showy on knee action, Miss Berry,” he said, “but
along about half-past eleven, when we get there, you’ll remark she’s
stiddy.”

It was only ten now.... Mud and miles and mail-boxes; dragging moments,
and miles and cold rain.... She had to talk a little. The journey of
the night was nearest, and she told how good the train-men had been to
her.

“You haven’t traveled much, Miss, I take it?” he said softly.

“Oh, no.” Then distantly again she remembered a Betty Berry of concert
seasons--on the wing from city to city. It was all too remote for
speech. At one house a woman came forth with tea and sandwiches. Betty
was grateful for the warm drink and wanted to pay, but the carrier
pushed back her hand and tucked her in again.

“Guess this is going to be a surprise for the bare-headed man?” he
asked.

“Yes.”

“He’s your young man, then?”

“Yes.”

He seemed relieved. “He won’t be staying out here much longer--not
likely--though we do have a spell of good weather in November mostly.”

Often she lost every sense of distance and identity. The lapses grew
longer toward the end, and when she did not answer, Jethro thought she
had fallen asleep.... A long stretch at last, barren of mail-boxes....
When he finally drew up, she followed his eyes to her lover’s name upon
the tin by the roadside. Then he pointed beyond the low near trees and
hollows. It was all desolate; the Fall tints subdued in the pervading
gray. She saw a clump of greater trees in the upper middle distance.

“’Bout a thousand feet straight in. Miss--and up--under them big trees.
You’ll see his shanty before you’re half-way. Just keep your eye on
them elms. He’d be down here if it was any kind of weather. Guess
you’re glad. D’ruther go alone and find him there, wouldn’t you?”

“Yes.... And now I want to give you this, please.”

He shook his head.

She could not leave him so. “For Lizzie--she’s so steady. I’m rich ...
and I’ll be much happier--going to the bare-headed man. Please--for
me----”

“Don’t you take that robe off!” he said suddenly. “I don’t want
it--jumpin’ in and out. I never take it out of the office till snow
flies. He’ll bring it down to the box, when I’m passin’ to-morrow. Why,
you’d get all soaked, Miss--a-goin’ up to him.... Well, I’ll take the
money for Lizzie--if you’re rich--but it’s ridiculous much, and I’d
have fetched you for nothin’.”

She pressed his hand in both of hers and turned away through the break
in the fence.... It seemed darker; and when the grinding of the tires
on the wet gravel died away, the dripping silence came home to her,
alien and fearful.... She had seen the name; soon she would see his
house--but this was no man’s land, an after-death land; this was ‘the
hollows and the vagueness of light,’ of which he had written....

She saw the house and faltered on. She had not the strength to call....
On the slope to the great trees the burden of the heavy robe would
have borne her to the ground, had she not let it fall from her.... She
could not believe the padlock on the door, felt it with her hands, the
weight and the brass of it. It was hard for her to understand the cruel
cold of it--as for a child that has never been hurt intentionally. She
sank to her knees and prayed that it was not there.... But it was. The
reality entered her brain, the thick icy metal of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Betty Berry--Betty Berry, I am coming!”

She lifted her head in the rain. His call was like a thought of her
own, but sharper, truer. This was his door. He was coming. It was still
light. She wanted to sleep again, but the death-like cold warned her.
She would die before he came....

She raised herself against the door. The black heap of the fur-robe on
the slope held her eyes.... On the way to it she fainted again; again
the cold rain roused her.... Always on the borders of the rousing, she
heard it:

“Betty Berry--Betty Berry, I am coming!”

She knelt in the wet leaves beside the robe ... her thoughts turned
back to the night--the goodness of the men, their tender voices....
There was a calling up in the dusk among the trees. Yes, she must lie
at his door. Men were good; the lock alone had hurt her. His Guardian
had put it there.... Upward she crawled, dragging the robe.

“Yes, you are coming!” she answered. Always when the cold rain roused
her, she would answer, and crawl a little farther with the robe. At the
door at last, she lay down beneath it....

Still again his calling roused her. It was darker--but not yet night....

“Betty Berry--Betty Berry, I am coming!”

It was nearer.

“I knew you would let me in,” she tried to say, and then--voices.... It
seemed as if the porter of the Old South had come.... His voice lulled
her, and his smile was the glow of the home-hearth.


                                   8

SHE was lying upon the single narrow bed.... Something long
ago had been premonitive of this. Morning’s mind, too, caught up the
remembrance of Moto-san and the Japanese Inn.... He watched. Sometimes
he said with all his will that she must not die. She could not die,
when his will was dominant, but he was exhausted; his will-power
flagged frequently.

All day yesterday in the train he had held her in his mind--sent
his calls to her across the miles. From different stations he had
telegraphed to Jake at Hackensack, to Jethro at the post-office, and to
his neighbor, the dairyman, who had a telephone. Jethro had been the
first to reach the cabin, but it was nearly dusk then. The others were
quick to appear. Jethro found her at the door, partly covered in the
furry robe. That robe crowned him in Morning’s mind. They had broken in
the door, and lit the fire. Morning reached the cabin at nine. Jethro
spoke of a doctor.

“I’m the doctor,” Morning said. The three had left him.

It was now after midnight. She had not aroused. Old scenes quivered
across the surface of her consciousness, starting a faintly mumbled
sentence now and then: The Armory, the first kiss, the road to
Baltimore, letters, hurried journeys, the Guardian; and much about the
latest journey--from cab to station, from porter to Pullman, from car
to clerk to carrier. He saw how the night and the day had used her
final strength. Always the Guardian intervened to break her will, and
Morning did not understand. There were other enemies; the studio, the
nurse, the padlock, and the rain. After brief hushes, she would speak
of his coming, or answer his calling.

It was the one theme of his life even now--the great thing Betty Berry
had done. It awed and chilled him to realize how coarse-fibered he
had been, so utterly impervious, not to sense the nature of the force
that had upheld him, nor the quality of the bestowals.... There was a
rending about it, and yet it was all so quiet now. It seemed to him
that a man’s life is husk after husk of illusion, that the illusions
are endless. He had torn them away, one after another, thinking each
time that he had come to the grain.... And what was the sum of his
finding so far? That good is eternal; that man loves God best by
serving men; that greatness is in the working, not in the result; that
a man who has found his work has found the soul’s sunlight, and that
service for men is its rain. Surely, these are not husks.... It had
been a hard, weary way. He was like a tired child now, and here was the
little mother--wearied with him unto death.... He had been so perverse
and headstrong. She had given him her love and guidance until her last
strength was spent. He must be the man now.... He wondered if his heart
would break, when he realized fully his own evil and her unfathomable
sweetness?... Must a woman always fall spent and near to death--before
a man can be finished? Or is it because her work is done that she falls?

He knelt beside her. Sometimes, in the lamplight, she looked as he had
seen her at the Armory; again, as if she were playing; now, it was as
she had been to him in the dark of the Pullman seat.... Who was the
Guardian?

... And this was what had come to her from teaching him the miracle
of listening alone.... It was true. He belonged to that life, as Duke
Fallows had always said. She had made him see it by going from him. He
would never be the same, after having tasted the greater love, in which
man and woman are one in the spirit of service, having renounced the
emblem of it. And with all her vision and leading--the glory of it had
not come to her as to him. It had all but killed her. She had come to
him--a forgotten purpose, a broken vessel.

He would love her back to life. That was his work now. Everything
must stop for that--even truth.... He halted. If he loved her back to
full and perfect health again, would she not be the same as she had
been? Would she not take up her Cross again?... No, he would not let
her. He would destroy the results of his work if necessary. He would
force himself to forget, even in the spirit--this taste of the mystic
oneness that had come to him. He would show his need for her every
hour. That would make her happy--his leaning upon her word and thought
and action. He would show her his need of her presence in the long,
excellent forenoons, in the very processes of his task--and in the
evenings, her hands, her kisses, her step, her voice; he would make her
see that these were his perfect essentials.

“I’ve talked and written a lot about how a man should live--in the past
six months,” he said grimly. “I’ve got to do a bit of real living in
the world now. God knows I love her--as I used to. That seemed enough
then!”

He looked up from her face. The ghost of day had come softly to the
South. He arose, took the lamp across the room and blew it out. Then he
opened the door. The mingled night and dawn came in, a cool dimness,
but the rain had ceased. He replenished the fire, left the door open,
and returned to her. She had become quiet since the lamp had been taken
away.... A sense of the man and woman together, and of her strength
returning crept upon him. He welcomed it, though the deeps cried out.

“When you are yourself, you will want to go away again--the long,
blinding ways of the sun,” he whispered. “But I will say, ‘I cannot
spare you, Betty Berry. This is the place for two to be. We will begin
again----’”

His thought of what she would answer brought back to mind the play,
_Compassion_, and the Book of John Morning.... He smiled. He had
almost forgotten. Night before last, at the beginning of the third
act, he had left the _Markheim_. He had given way suddenly to
the thought that had pulled at him all day--to take the train to
Betty Berry that night.... The play had seemed good. Even to him
there had been moments of thrilling joy. It had been surprisingly
different, sitting in front with the audience, from the rehearsals. Of
yesterday’s notices he had not seen a single one. It was a far thought
to him even now of the play’s failure, but if it did fail, how easy
to say to Betty Berry, “You see, how mad I was alone--how mad in my
exaltation--how terribly out of tune? I needed you here. I need you
now----”

Then he thought of the bigger thing--the Book. There wasn’t a chance
for that to fail. It would find its own. What would he say about
that?... He would say, “I love you, Betty Berry. It was loving you that
made the book. And when it was done--how I longed for you!”

That was true--true now.... He kissed her shut eyelids. There was
blessedness in her being here--even shattered and so close to
death--blessedness and a dreadful fear. That fear was ever winging
around, but did not come home to him and fold its wings. He was not
himself.... “My God!” he cried out, “what folds upon folds and phases
upon phases of experience a man must pass to learn to live----”

For an instant it all came back--that taste of the open road and larger
dimension of man--the listening, the labor, the sharpened senses, scant
diet, tireless service, ‘the great companions’--love of the world and
unfailing compassion.... It was as they had said. He had belonged
everywhere but in a woman’s arms....

It came clear as a vision, and he put it from him as an evil thing--and
all the voices. The red dawn was staring into his eyes, and afar off a
horse nickered. He held his hands against the light, as if to destroy
it.

“I have said it in the Book, ‘We have all eternity to play in,’ and if
that is not a lie--this Call will come to me again!”

And this was his renunciation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her stillness troubled him.

“I am your lover,” he whispered. “I will not let you go, Betty Berry.
Don’t you hear--I love you?”

He lifted her, walked to and fro between the fire and the cot. She
was so very little.... The day came up with a mystic shining, and the
warmth returned. These were the first hours of that fleeting Indian
summer, the year’s illumination--the serene and conscious death of
Summer.... The door was wide open to the light.... Morning put down his
burden, but could not be still. He brought water and scrubbed the floor
and door-step. The wood shone white as it dried--white as the square
table which was an attraction of daylight. He tossed the water away
down the hollow, drew more and washed as the countrymen do, lifting
handfuls to his head. Then he brought basin, soap, and towels--bathed
her face and hands, afterward carrying her forth to the sunlight. The
thin shade of the elms was far down the meadow, for the day was not
high.

“I love you, Betty Berry,” he continued to repeat, as he turned again
and again to the cot. There was an hypnotic effect in the words; and
there was a certain numbed surface in his brain that refused to cope
with the immediate stresses in the room.

Jethro came early, and was not content to leave the mail at the box.
He brought letters, a paper, and a large package. Jethro looked at the
face on the cot and at the bare-headed man. Words failed him to whom
words were so easy. He ventured to mention the name of a doctor, and
was answered furiously:

“I am the doctor.”

Jethro lingered. Morning turned suddenly to look at the cot, and
it seemed to the carrier that his eyes would have frightened away
death.... Morning caught him by the shoulders:

“You’re a good man, Jethro,” he said hastily. “When I think of that fur
robe--it seems as if I’ve got to do something for you with my hands.”

The carrier went his way.

       *       *       *       *       *

This he found in the newspaper--a “follow” paragraph apparently to the
dramatic notice of the day before:

  “The second performance of _Compassion_ last night to a
  fairly filled house is interesting in its relation to the fear
  frankly expressed in this column yesterday, to the effect that
  _Compassion_ is too good a play to get on well. The fear was well
  founded upon experience; and yet we may have before us an exception--a
  quality of excellence that will not be subdued. It is too much to hope
  for, that at any other time this season we will be equally glad to
  find our fear for a play’s future ill-founded.”

Morning had not known of the doubt; and this was the rise of the
tide again from the doubt.... He glanced at the package. There was
a spreading cold in his vitals. It was from the publisher he had
chosen--the Book of John Morning returned.

He was hostile for an instant--an old vindictive self resenting
this touch upon his gift of self-revelation. The protecting thought
followed quickly that the book was in no way changed by this accident
of encountering the wrong publisher. The really important part of the
incident followed these insignificant thoughts: Above all things, this
letter would help to prove to Betty Berry his need for her. He would
not send it out again at once. This refusal would weigh more than
anything he could say, to prove that loneliness had been too much, too
strong for him--that it had thrown his work out of reality, instead of
into it.... He was bending over her. A step at the door, and he turned
to find Helen Quiston there.


                                   9

SHE entered and went to the cot, without words, but pressed
his hand as she passed....

“You were there--and you let her get so low as this.”

Helen turned to search his face. “Yes,” she said.

“Who is this--Guardian?”

“Some angel that came to her, I think.”

“He seems very real to her----”

“Angels are real.”

“Angels do not make saints suffer----”

“On the contrary, that appears to be the life-business of saints----”

“She will never go back to that!” he said with low vehemence.

Helen regarded her old comrade for a moment, kissed her reverently, and
then turned to the man.

“You poor boy,” she said.

There was something cold and rock-like about this slave of the future,
looking over and beyond the imminent tragedy. He was helpless,
maddened....

“She always said you loved her--that you were the one woman absolutely
true. How could you let her destroy herself?”

“I knew her before you came, and loved her. I gave her my house. I
waited upon her night and morning. I love Betty Berry. You are torn and
tortured, but you will see----”

“She will not be away from me again!... Bah! what is work--to this?”

Helen smiled. “Do you think she would have come if she had been the
real Betty Berry?”

“Do you think I would have been duped--had I been the real John
Morning?”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean a man is mad when he is doing a book. He may call it happiness,
but it is a kind of devil’s madness. He is open for anything to rush
in.... I am a common man. I do not belong to that visionary thing----”

“You are caught in your emotions. I know your work----”

He drew her to the door, saying excitedly:

“_Compassion_ threatens to fail. My book has come back,” he said
triumphantly. “Look at this----”

He gave her the publisher’s letter.

“Your play has not failed,” she said.... “And this--why, this is just
a bit of the world. John Morning at thirty-three--talks of failure.
Let us talk over this day, when you are fifty-three.... What an empty
victory for her--if you failed now----”

She was looking back at the cot. Morning whispered his reiteration:

“I love her. I shall have her here. I shall make her see that I love
her. _That_ is my service. You are all mad conspirators against
us. We are man and woman. Our world is each other. She shall see and
believe this--if I write drivel----”

Helen did not seem quite to hear him. She drew away from him as if
called in a trance to the bedside.

“My little dearest--oh, Betty Berry--you have done so well. You have
paid the price for a World-Man----”

Morning followed her.... Betty’s eyes were opened--fixed upon Helen
Quiston.

“What did you say?” she questioned wonderingly.

“God love you, Betty. I said you had paid the price for a World-Man----”

She raised on her elbow alone, her eyes now looking beyond the woman to
Morning.

“He is there,” she whispered. “He is there. He has come.”

Her hand stretched toward him, and sank slowly to his brow as he knelt.

“My love,” she said.... “It is all right. I see it all once more. It is
so good and right--just as your Guardian told me.... It was only the
birth-pangs I suffered. They were hard.... Birth is hard, but death is
easy. Don’t you see, Helen, he was my little baby?... Oh, you came so
hard, John Morning--and, oh, I love you so!”

He saw the fact of her passing, but the deeper realization was slow. It
was much to him, for the instant, that she spoke and looked into his
eyes.

“I love you, Betty Berry,” he said, his voice lifting. “I love you as a
saint, as a mother--as a child!”

“But not as a woman,” she whispered.

                               THE END.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

 --On page 9, oustide has been changed to outside.
 --On page 28, redouts has been changed to redoubts.
 --On page 43, foxtails has been changed to fox-tails.
 --On page 60, Koupangtze has been changed to Koupangtse.
 --On page 91, Nagaski has been changed to Nagasaki.
 --On page 110, story--idea has been changed to story-idea.
 --On page 126, “the the” has eliminated the second word.
 --On page 191, altar has been changed to alter.
 --On page 206, sorows has been changed to sorrows.
 --On page 245, settle has been changed to settled.
 --On page 246, wordly has been changed to worldly.
 --On page 274, even has been changed to ever.
 --On page 276, elums has been changed to elms.
 --On page 279, cousciousness has been changed to consciousness.
 --All other hyphenation and spelling has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOWN AMONG MEN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
